10 of the best: feel-good summer getaways. Ready to book the ultimate summer break? Check out these incredible, sun-drenched spots, hand-picked by our partner Mr & Mrs Smith With the summer holidays fast-approaching, it’s time to book that well-deserved break. We ask the travel experts at Mr & Mrs Smith for the best spots around the world to soak up the sun – and the culture – with a focus on stunning outdoor spaces. Whether it’s a panoramic rooftop bar in New York, a lakeside pool in Lake Como or the rolling hills of the Cotswolds, here’s their pick of the finest summer breaks. Vitality members , don’t forget that you can book these offers through the Vitality Member Zone to claim your Mr & Mrs Smith Vitality discount of up to 25% off (up to a maximum of £125, depending on your Vitality status). 1. For romantic views: Sun Rocks, Santorini, Greece Carved out of the volcanic rock, this elegant hotel is exclusively for couples and offers stunning views of the Aegean Sea. The rooms and suites are decorated in a monochrome palette and some even have romantic Jacuzzis for ultimate relaxation. 2. For big city adventures: Hotel Hugo, New York, US Hotel Hugo is tucked between SoHo and the Hudson River in Hudson Square and is full of retro charm. You’ll be close to NoHo’s boutiques and Greenwich Village’s stylish cafes but for all the famous landmarks you need only head to the hotel’s rooftop bar, aglow with neon lights, to spot the Chrysler Building, the Empire State Building and the State of Liberty. Mr & Mrs Smith exclusive : 25% off on three nights, with breakfast included (book by 31 December 2018) 3. For delicious, rustic food: Manoir de Surville, Normandy, France This 16 th -century hotel has plenty of Norman charm with decorative timber framing and traditional gardens, studded with apple trees. Spend your days relaxing by the brand new pool, feasting on the region’s best produce or exploring the streets of Normandy – you’re right in the centre of it all. 4. For lakeside chill-out time: Grand Hotel Tremezzo, Lake Como, Italy If you’re looking for grand Riviera style, this hotel is the one. Set on the edge of Lake Como, one of its three pools floats elegantly out on the waters. Add to that an indulgent spa, waterside bar and amazing in-house Italian dining and you’ve got la dolce vita ! 5. For poolside lounging: Font Santa, Mallorca, Spain The neutral-hued Font Santa Hotel is a soulful spot, set close to the island’s best-looking beach and the infamous salt mounds at Es Salobrar. The wild Balearic landscape is a beautiful backdrop for the outdoor terrace. Inside you’ll find an atmospheric spa with a thermal pool. 6. For country walks: Kings Head Hotel, Cirencester, UK Once owned by an Elizabethan bailiff, this hotel has plenty of historic touches, from the old stone walls to the wooden beams. Kick back in the spa or relax in the bar with a summery elderflower G&T. Outside, there’s the local countryside to explore and plenty of walking trails to wander. Mr & Mrs Smith exclusive : ‘Just the two of us’ treat – dinner up to the value of £30 per person, 20% off all pre-booked spa treatments, full English breakfast and a box of chocolates (book by 31 December 2018) 7. For creative culture: The Emblem Hotel, Prague, Czech Republic Coloured with striking artworks, this spirited hotel favours innovative shared spaces over big bedrooms. There’s an entire communal floor dedicated to socialising and relaxing, while your own space is more stylish and bijou. After strolling the bustling streets of Prague head to the rooftop, where there’s a romantic Jacuzzi. Or book a table at the restaurant, specialising in steak and wine. 8. For beachfront luxury: Casa de la Flora, Khao Lak, Thailand Run away to this tropical hotel; it’s a dreamy mix of modernist architecture and swaying palm trees. The beach is just beyond the bedroom if you book one of the beachfront Suite Pool Villas and you’ll have your own private pool, too. Don’t miss the blissful spa and the amazing restaurant, serving playful Thai dishes. 9. For sophisticated country pursuits: The Wheatsheaf Inn, Cotswolds, UK This country inn has had a modern makeover, where 17 th -century period features meet stylish design. You’ll find roll-top baths in the bedrooms along with cosy robes and throws. Explore the surrounding country lanes and quaint shops or try your hand at clay pigeon-shooting at a club nearby. 10. For drama and playtime: Hotel Zeppelin, San Francisco, US Set in the heart of San Francisco’s theatre district, this iconic hotel is full of drama. There’s an old-school black light-lit bar and modern art pieces, while the restaurant serves up colourful Californian fare from Bay-fresh oysters to wood-fired pizza. Vitality member exclusive : 20% off stays of four nights or more, 15% off stays of three nights or more (book by 15 July 2018). Book through the Vitality Member Zone for this exclusive deal. Before you jet off, check out our 8 healthy holiday hacks from the travel experts. Get a discount of up to 25% on luxury and boutique hotels Book your stay in a Mr & Mrs Smith hotel and you’ll get a discount of up to 25%*. Find out more * Up to a maximum amount of £125, depending on your Vitality status. Further terms and conditions apply.