10 Surprising Reasons To Quit Smoking. From looking younger within just 12 hours to sleeping and tasting better, Colleen Dwyer from Vitality partner Allen Carr’s Easyway tells us why focusing on the immediate benefits of quitting can make all the difference. Here Colleen shares 10 brilliant benefits to motivate you… 1. You’ll look younger Within 12 hours of your last cigarette, your blood starts carrying oxygen and nutrients rather than poisons and carbon monoxide. This means your skin receives more oxygen and vital vitamins, leaving it better protected from toxic damage. Without the toxic chemicals you’ll also develop less wrinkles and have healthier, thicker hair. This is just the first reason as to why quitting smoking is would be beneficial to your health, although everyone knows this. Why not look into alternative ways to give this up, like using nicotine gum or nicotine patches? You never know which one is best for you unless you try. 2. You’ll sleep better Smokers are more likely to have problems sleeping . Without the nicotine withdrawal, you’re less likely to toss and turn in bed. You’ll experience better quality sleep and wake up feeling better rested. 3. You’ll have improved taste and smell It’s only a matter of days before your sense of taste returns and you can appreciate and be sensitive to different tastes. You might even find you need less salt and sugar. 4. You’ll have more energy Once you quit, your oxygen levels return to normal and your circulation starts to improve . Your lung capacity and functionality begins to return to normal after just 72 hours, meaning your breathing will become easier and you can begin to up your fitness levels. 5. You’ll boost your immune system The increase in oxygen in the body can make it easier to fight off colds and flu , and even the likelihood of headaches. 6. You’ll feel empowered and more confident The constant worry of what we are doing to our health, the effort of buying cigarettes, smoking them and dealing with the aftermath of having smoked them – it all takes its toll on us as smokers. No longer attributing our ability to socialise, cope with stress or relieve boredom to smoking is a massive boost to our self-confidence. 7. You’ll feel closer to your loved ones Smoking can drive a wedge between yourself and your family as you duck out of things or wish things will come to an end quickly so that you can smoke. Very importantly, you’re also not exposing them to harmful secondhand smoke. 8. You’ll be more present Escaping from cigarettes leaves you with more headspace for everyone and everything around you. It means you can be more mentally present in conversations and experiences rather than constantly thinking about your next cigarette. 9. You’ll have more time Not only are you adding years to your life ( getting free from cigarettes at age 30 adds 10 years, while people who kick the habit at 60 add three years on average ) but without all the cigarette breaks you will have more time and can even increase your productivity at work. 10. You’ll have more freedom Being a non-smoker opens up your opportunities – no longer do you have to consider where you go out, where you go on holiday, where you live or who you go out with based on your habit. Want to give up smoking? Try Allen Carr’s Easyway programme What is Allen Carr’s Easyway? Described as ‘a real smoker’s way to quit’, Allen Carr is a unique programme to help you give up the habit. With seminars, talks, books, telephone and online support, it has helped 1.4 million people worldwide and has a 90% success rate. Why is Allen Carr’s Easyway different? Allen Carr doesn’t focus on the downsides of smoking, there are no scare tactics, and instead the programme focuses on removing the smoker’s fears of being without cigarettes. The method answers the question, ‘What’s so great about being a smoker?’ which can be the key to being set free of the habit. How can it help me quit smoking? You can attend friendly seminars that focus on removing the fears regarding weight gain, stress and boredom. Cigarettes are doing the opposite of what we think they are – causing more stress and hassle as opposed to helping. They analyse your motivations for smoking, allowing you cigarette breaks so you’re not focused on the panic of not being allowed to. In fact, you can smoke until the end of the programme, when everyone smokes their final cigarette together. Going through it with other people offering a network of support can be very effective. They don’t embarrass or force you to speak. It’s solely on your terms. They also offer booster seminars and telephone support if you need it. As a Vitality member, you could save up to £299 on the Allen Carr Stop Smoking Programme. Available with eligible health insurance , life insurance and investments plans. Log in to Member Zone for the details. Smoking