3 Easy Mocktail Recipes To Try At Home. Whether you’re a teetotaller or simply trying to cut back on your alcohol intake this party season, Cocktail Kate’s shaken up three delicious mocktails that are perfect for any festive season occasion… The festive season is just around the corner and with that comes an influx of parties, socialising and generous amounts of drinking… But it doesn’t always have to be this way, the latest statistics show that as a nation alcohol consumption is decreasing, so much so that we’re drinking a lot less compared to 10 years ago. By 2030 it’s predicted that more than 13% of us will abstain from alcohol . In fact, the proportion of men and women usually drinking at increased or higher risk of harm decreased between 2011 and 2017 (from 34% to 28% of men, and from 18% to 14% of women). With the winds of change behind us, we’ve enlisted bartender and drink educator extraordinaire Cocktail Kate to shake up some tasty mocktails to see you through the party season. Raspberry Faux-jito! This fruity mocktail is a delicious blend of fresh mint leaves, lime juice and raspberries. Makes one but the ingredients can easily go further if friends are around. Ingredients: 50ml fresh lime juice 20ml agave syrup (to taste) 6-8 raspberries, plus extra to garnish 6-8 mint leaves, plus an extra sprig to garnish Crushed ice Sparkling water Serves 1 Method: Pour the lime juice and agave syrup into a tall glass. Add the raspberries and then using a cocktail stirrer or fork, gently muddle everything together and crush the raspberries. Place the mint leaves in the palm of your hand and give them a smack to release the aromas. Pop them in the glass. Fill with crushed ice and muddle again. Top with sparkling water and garnish with a sprig of mint leaves and a couple of raspberries. Mulled Apple Winter Warmer Cloudy apple juice is gently spiced with ginger and nutmeg, and warmed through, making it a fab tipple to enjoy on a cold winter’s day. The quantities can easily be doubled for a party. Ingredients: 2 litres cloudy apple juice 100ml honey (to taste) Fresh ginger, finely chopped into matchsticks (a pinch for a little fire or a palmful for a fiery kick) 1 tbsp fresh grated nutmeg (or a gentle sprinkle for a mild warming spice) Pared orange zest, to garnish Serves 5 Method: Place all ingredients in a pan on a low heat, stirring the mixture until your desired temperature. Take care not to boil it as that will make the flavours turn sour. Using a tea strainer, carefully ladle the apple juice into a vessel that can hold hot liquids. Cups and mugs are great for this. Garnish with a twist of orange zest, squeezing it so that it releases its oils, and drop in. Iced ’n Spiced Plum Tea Make your own spiced plum cordial for this fruity twist on classic iced tea. The cordial can also be enjoyed with sparkling water and a slice of lemon. Ingredients: For the cordial 4 plums 1 cinnamon stick Drizzle of honey, to taste For the cocktail 2 English Breakfast tea bags 50ml spiced plum cordial Ice cubes 1 lemon, zest pared Serves 8 Method: Boil a kettle and pour 300ml water over the tea bags. Leave to brew until the liquid is a deep amber colour, then remove the tea bags and put the tea in the fridge. Chill for 15 minutes. Place the plums in a saucepan and snap the cinnamon stick in the pan. Cover with boiling water and simmer on a low heat for 15-20 minutes. As the plums start to break down, gently crush them with a wooden spoon. When the liquid is a deep purple colour and the plums have broken down, sieve the contents into a jug, add a drizzle of honey to taste and cool for 20 minutes. It should be nice and syrupy. To make the cocktail, pour 50ml of plum cordial into a rocks glass. Fill the glass with cubed ice and top with chilled breakfast tea. Squeeze the lemon zest over the top and drop in. Thinking of cutting back? Read our interview with Laura Willoughby for expert tips on avoiding peer-pressure and great low-to-no alcohol bars across the UK.