3 healthy leftover turkey recipes. Looking for some wholesome recipe ideas for shaking up your turkey leftovers? We’ve asked our expert contributors for three of their favourites. We all have leftovers after our Christmas feasting. Rather than letting them go to waste, did you know that your turkey will last three-four days in the fridge and up to three months in the freezer (check out the NHS’ turkey storing advice ). But you don’t need to suffer the dry turkey sandwich. It’s easy to spice it up with these three tasty and healthy hacks that everyone will love (ready in 30 minutes or less). 1. Madeleine Shaw’s shredded turkey salad with fresh mint, kale and avocado This salad is high in protein and has bursts of sweet pomegranate and salty miso kale. Why not serve it up for a healthy lunch? Serves 2 Ready in 30 minutes Ingredients: 2 tbsp miso paste 1 tbsp honey 1 tbsp sesame oil 2 tbsp apple cider vinegar or rice wine 2 tbsp freshly squeezed lemon juice 3 tbsp olive oil sea salt Freshly ground black pepper 50g of kale 2 turkey breasts 1 tbsp of butter or coconut oil 30g of toasted flaked almonds ½ pomegranate 1 avocado 2 tbsp of freshly chopped mint Method: Add the miso, honey, sesame oil, vinegar and lemon juice to a medium bowl, whisking to combine. In a slow, steady stream, whisk in olive oil until emulsified. Season to taste with salt and black pepper. Finely chop the kale into thin slithers and place in a large bowl, and drizzle over ¾ of the dressing. Using your hands, work the vinaigrette throughout the greens, tossing and massaging for three minutes until the kale wilts. The leaves should be glistening with vinaigrette, not swimming in it. Leave this to the side while you make the rest of the salad. Heat 1 tbsp of oil in a large pan. Season the turkey with salt, pepper and pan-roast for six minutes each side until cooked through. Leave to the side to cool. Cut the avocado in chunks and dip them in the rest of the dressing. Mix the avocado with the kale. Remove the pomegranate seeds and mix with the salad. Shred the turkey and mix in with the salad. Throw over the flaked almond and freshly chopped mint and serve. 2. The Mindful Chef’s crunchy peanut and turkey black rice noodles Use up your turkey by stir-frying with carrot ribbons and crunchy shredded sprouts. Also, try black rice noodles for something a little different! Serves 2 Ready in 20 minutes Ingredients: 100g Brussels sprouts 120g black rice noodles 150g carrot 1 lime 1 red chilli 1 tbsp tamari 1 tsp oil 2 garlic cloves 2 tbsp peanut paste 2 tsp honey 2 x 170g free-range chicken breast Large handful of fresh coriander Method: Trim the sprouts, thinly slice and roughly chop. Using a peeler or julienne peeler, thinly slice the carrot into long thin ribbons. Peel and grate or crush the garlic. Thinly slice the red chilli (removing the seeds for less heat). Slice the chicken into bite-sized pieces and season with sea salt and black pepper. Heat a large frying pan with 1 tsp oil on a medium heat and fry the garlic for one minute, then add the chicken pieces for seven minutes, turning occasionally until golden brown. Meanwhile, boil a kettle. Pour 500ml boiling water into a saucepan and bring to the boil, then add the black rice noodles with a pinch of sea salt and simmer for five minutes (stir often to prevent sticking). Once cooked, rinse briefly in cold water and set aside. To make the peanut sauce; in a bowl, mix the tamari, honey, juice from the lime, peanut paste and half of the chilli. Add the sprouts and carrots to the pan with the chicken and fry for three minutes. Add the cooked noodles to the pan with the chicken and vegetables and stir in the sauce, cook for two minutes. Roughly tear the coriander leaves, then stir through half of these. Spoon the peanut and chicken black rice noodles onto two warm plates and top with the remaining slices of chilli and coriander. 3. Dean Edward’s fragrant turkey noodle broth Has the cold weather got you craving something warming? This delicious broth is simply, quick and perfect for a light supper. Serves 4 Ready in 15 minutes Ingredients: 1 litre good chicken stock 3 garlic cloves, crushed 1 tbsp grated fresh root ginger 1 red chilli, sliced (optional) 500g lean turkey breast, thinly sliced 100g bean sprouts 4 or 5 spring onions, sliced 1-2 tbsp soy sauce, to taste 4 egg noodle nests Small bunch of fresh mint, chopped, to serve Small bunch of fresh coriander, chopped, to serve Method: Pour the stock into a large saucepan and bring it to a simmer. Add the garlic, ginger and chilli, if using, and cook for five minutes. Add the sliced turkey and continue cooking for 10 minutes before stirring in the bean sprouts and some of the sliced spring onions. Season with soy sauce to taste. Meanwhile, cook the noodles in boiling water for three-four minutes. Drain well and serve one nest into each bowl, then ladle in the broth. Finish the dish with the rest of the spring onions and plenty of mint and coriander. Recipe extracted from: Feel-good Family Food by Dean Edwards (£17.99, Bantam Press) Want to cook like the Bake Off queen Prue Leith? Try three of her favourite healthy recipes .