3 star-quality smoothies for all-day energy. Arsenal footballers Theo Walcott, Mathieu Flamini and Olivier Giroud go head-to-head in our Great Big Smoothie Challenge… As the Official Wellness Partner for Arsenal FC, we got together with them to devise an action-packed challenge for the Arsenal players that would provide the rest of us with something healthy and delicious. There’s nothing better for packing in vitamins than a tasty, fruity smoothie, which is why we devised The Great Big Smoothie Challenge. In it, we pit super-competitive professional footballers Theo Walcott, Mathieu Flamini and Olivier Giroud against one another in a high-octane smoothie standoff, then invite Shad Forsythe, Arsenal’s Head of Performance, to score their skills. Here are the results… Walcott’s Brekkie Boost Theo’s smoothie is the perfect kick-starter breakfast. Banana and porridge oats provide slow-release energy, while frozen berries add a sweet hit. 1/2 banana 150g mixed frozen berries 150ml unsweetened almond milk 20g porridge oats Put all of the ingredients into a blender and whizz until smooth. Pour into a chilled glass and serve. Recommended serving size per person is 150ml. Shad’s score: 5/10 The Flamini Superfood Spectacular This sensational superfood smoothie is just the thing if you’re feeling under the weather. Blueberries are bursting with antioxidants and honey can help with digestion. 1/2 banana 100g blueberries 75g cantaloupe melon 75g pineapple Handful of black grapes 2 tsp honey (optional) Add pineapple juice for desired consistency Put all of the ingredients into a blender and whizz until smooth. Pour into a chilled glass and serve. Recommended serving size per person is 150ml. Shad’s score: 7/10 The Giroud Snack Attacker If your stomach starts rumbling mid-afternoon, try this filling and hydrating smoothie with cucumber and cantaloupe. Almond milk is low in fat but high in flavour and potassium-packed banana can help stabilise blood pressure. 1/2 banana 125g cantaloupe melon 75g pineapple 1/4 cucumber 125ml unsweetened almond milk Put all of the ingredients into a blender and whizz until smooth. Pour into a chilled glass and serve. Recommended serving size per person is 150ml. Shad’s score: 6/10 Smoothie news: According to Public Health England’s Eatwell Guide (published 17 March 2016), fruit / vegetable juices and smoothies should be limited to a combined total of 150ml (contributing a maximum of one portion a day towards 5 A Day). The Eatwell Guide also recommends that adults should be aiming to have 6 to 8 glasses of fluids per day, ideally from water, lower fat milks and unsweetened tea or coffee.