3 Vegan Recipes For The Festive Season. Delicious, easy vegan recipes to see you through the festive season… The festive period is a fun, party-filled time of year which is typically associated with excess, whether it’s alcohol consumption or food. As many of us will be entertaining during December, we asked Katy Beskow to create three fabulous vegan Christmas recipes. With 22 million people identifying as flexitarian in the UK , and both Waitrose and Tesco seeing huge increases in sales of vegan products, plant-based food shows no signs of losing popularity. Pop some Christmas music on and invite some friends round to tuck into these tasty party dishes! Vegan cranberry and chestnut rolls Off the back of the rave reviews Greggs’ vegan sausage roll received, this is Katy’s take on a festive sausage roll. Serve with extra cranberry sauce for dipping, if you like. Makes 10 rolls Ingredients 1 tbsp sunflower oil, plus 2 tsp for brushing 180g vacuum packed roasted chestnuts, finely chopped 1 small onion, peeled and diced 1 tsp dried sage Generous pinch of sea salt and black pepper 4 sheets of filo pastry, ensure dairy-free 4 tsp cranberry sauce, plus extra to serve ½ tsp nigella seeds Method Pre-heat the oven to 200°C/gas mark 6 and line two baking trays with greaseproof paper. Heat 1 tbsp of sunflower oil in a large saucepan, then add the onion and dried sage. Cook for 2-3 minutes, stirring frequently, until the onion starts to soften. Add the chopped chestnuts then cook for a further 2 minutes. Season with sea salt and black pepper, then remove from the heat. Lay out one sheet of filo pastry on a clean, flat surface. Use a pastry brush to sweep over a little sunflower oil, and place over a second sheet of filo pastry. Spoon 2 tsp of cranberry sauce in a straight line 4cm from the top of the pastry. Spoon over half of the chestnut mixture over the cranberry sauce. Roll the pastry to form a log shape, tightly to secure the filling. Use a sharp knife to cut the roll into 5 even pieces, then place on a baking tray. Brush the tops with a little sunflower oil, then scatter over the nigella seeds. Repeat from step 4 to use the remaining pastry and chestnut filling. Bake in the oven for 25 minutes until golden and crisp. Serve with extra cranberry sauce for dipping. Apricot, pistachio and chickpea kofte These kofte are jam-packed with flavour and a great addition to your vegan party platter. The lettuce cup acts as an edible spoon and the pomegranate gives the kofte a festive sparkle! Makes about 20 koftes Ingredients 1 tbsp sunflower oil 1 onion, peeled and diced ½ tsp dried oregano 1 tsp ground cumin 1 tbsp shelled pistachios 300g canned chickpeas, thoroughly drained and rinsed 1 tbsp brown sauce Generous pinch of sea salt 140g dried apricots, finely chopped Little gem lettuce leaves (to serve) 1 pack of pomegranate 100g tahini Juice of 1 unwaxed lemon Method Pre-heat the oven to 180°C/gas mark 4. Heat the oil in a non-stick frying pan and add the onion cooking over a medium-high heat for 2-3 minutes until the onion begins to soften. Stir in the cumin, oregano and pistachios and cook for a further 2 minutes. In the meantime, add the chickpeas to a bowl and pour over enough boiling water to cover them. Leave to stand for 5 minutes (this will help the chickpeas to blend easily in the next step), then drain away the water. Add the cooked onions and pistachios to a blender or food processor, along with any remaining oil from the pan. Add in the drained chickpeas and a pinch of sea salt, then blitz until a thick, semi-smooth paste is created. Stir through the dried apricots. Scoop out ½ tbsp amounts of the mixture and roll into approximately 20 bite-sized balls. Place on a baking tray and bake in the oven for 25-30 minutes until golden. To make the tahini dressing, squeeze the lemon juice into a bowl, add the tahini, a pinch of salt and whisk. Add a splash of water if it becomes too thick. Adjust as necessary. Serve the koftes in little gem lettuce leaves, drizzle over the tahini dressing and sprinkle the pomegranate seeds. Vegan St Clement’s mince pies Christmas isn’t Christmas without mince pies! These vegan versions are flavoured with oranges and lemons and dusted with icing sugar for a festive party pleaser. Makes about 12 mince pies Ingredients 1 sheet of ready rolled puff pastry (ensure dairy-free), at room temperature 4 rounded tbsp of good quality sweet mincemeat (ensure vegetable suet) 1 rounded tbsp candied lemon peel 2 tsp orange liqueur 1 unwaxed orange 1 tbsp soya milk Icing sugar to dust Method Pre-heat the oven to 220°C/gas mark 7, and line a baking tray with parchment paper. Lay the puff pastry sheet on a flat surface and use a round 5cm cutter to press out pastry discs. Place them onto the baking tray. Using a smaller 4cm cutter, press gently into the centre of each pastry disc to leave a light indentation – this shouldn’t cut through the pastry. Spoon the mincemeat into a bowl and mix in the candied lemon peel and orange liqueur. Grate in the zest of the orange and stir through. Spoon a small amount of the mincemeat into the centre of the pastry discs, then brush a little soya milk over the pastry edges. Bake in the oven for 10-12 minutes until golden. Dust with icing sugar just before serving. As a Vitality member, you could get up to 25% cashback on Waitrose & Partners Good Health food when you get active. If you have a second eligible health insurance or life insurance plan, you could get up to 40% cashback. Excludes beverages. Log in to Member Zone for the details.