3 Vegan BBQ Recipes. Whether you’re vegan, vegetarian or a Meat Free Monday fan, these tasty vegan BBQ recipes from Katy Beskow are sure to tempt everyone. Katy is an author and food writer who started her blog, Little Miss Meat-Free, back in 2013 in a bid to share her recipes and ideas for cooking more creatively without meat and dairy. Since then she’s gone on to write four best-selling vegan cookbooks, and regularly teaches cooking classes and demos at food festivals. Light the fire and tuck into these mouth-watering, easy dishes. Double-Decker Spicy Falafel Burger The quantities can easily be doubled and you can mix and match what you build and top yours with. Napkins are very much needed! Serves: 1 For the burgers: 400g can chickpeas, drained and rinsed 2 rounded tsp ground cumin ½ tsp smoked paprika ½ tsp dried chilli flakes 1 handful of fresh flat-leaf parsley with stalks 2 handfuls of fresh coriander with stalks 1 tsp harissa paste 1 slice of white bread, grated into breadcrumbs 4 tbsp sunflower oil 1 tbsp sesame seeds To serve: 1 large seeded white bread bun, halved ½ baby gem lettuce, tough stems discarded and roughly sliced 1 tbsp hummus 4 red onion rings 1 tbsp fruity chutney of your choice Method: 1) To make the burgers, add the chickpeas, cumin, smoked paprika, chilli flakes, coriander, parsley and harissa to a high-powered blender and blitz until semi-smooth. Leave some chunks in there to add bite. 2) Carefully remove the mixture from the blender and shape into two flat burgers. 3) Mix the breadcrumbs and sesame seeds onto a saucer and gently press the burgers into them. 4) Add your two burgers to the grill and cook for 4-5 minutes on each side until golden. And toast your buns on there for a couple of minutes as well. 5) Remove from the heat and layer the lettuce onto half of the bun. 6) Place the first burger onto the lettuce and spoon on houmous and onion rings, then add the second burger and chutney. Top with the other bun half, serve immediately and get stuck in! Fancy some hummus to top your burger? Why not try our Rainbow Hummus recipe. Harissa Aubergine Kebabs With Cucumber, Red Onion And Mint Relish Aubergines are great for barbecuing as they keep their shape and can take big flavours. These kebabs are sticky and sweet but have a spicy kick. Pile them high on flatbreads with the cooling relish and a drizzle of tahini for an epic feast. Serves: 2 For the kebabs: 1 large aubergine, cut into 3cm chunks 6 whole cherry tomatoes 2 tbsp harissa paste 1 tbsp maple syrup 2 large flatbreads 1 x pack pomegranate seeds Generous drizzle of tahini paste For the relish: ¼ small cucumber, finely chopped 1 small red onion, finely chopped Handful of fresh mint leaves, roughly chopped 1 tbsp cider vinegar Method: 1) Thread the aubergine chunks and cherry tomatoes onto two metal or pre-soaked wooden skewers. 2) Whisk the harissa paste and maple syrup into a large bowl, then dip the skewers into the mixture, generously coating the aubergine and tomatoes. 3) Place the skewers onto the grill and barbecue for 5-6 minutes, then turn on the other side and cook for a further 5 minutes. 4) In the meantime, prepare the relish. Put the cucumber and red onion in a small bowl and story through the mint. Sprinkle over the vinegar and allow to infuse while the kebabs are cooking. 5) Grill the flatbreads and arrange them on a platter. Liberally sprinkle over the pomegranate seeds. Carefully remove the kebabs from the barbecue and slide off the vegetables onto the flatbreads. Spoon over the relish and tahini and serve immediately. Apricot, Pistachio And Mint Pilaf Every BBQ needs a delicious side dish and this pilaf is jam-packed with big flavours. Plus, any leftovers are great for lunch the next day. Ingredients: 100g bulgur wheat Generous handful of fresh mint leaves, finely chopped Generous handful of fresh flat-leaf parsley, finely chopped 15 soft dried apricots, finely chopped 3 tbsp shelled pistachios, roughly chopped Generous drizzle of extra virgin olive oil 1 unwaxed lemon, sliced Generous pinch of sea salt Method: 1) Place the bulgur wheat into a small bowl and pour over enough boiling-hot water to cover. Place a plate over the bowl to form a seal and aid absorption of the water into the wheat. Leave to stand for 10 mins. 2) Spoon the bulgur wheat into a mixing bowl and stir in the mint, parsley, apricots and pistachios. 3) Stir though the extra virgin olive oil and lemon slices, then sprinkle through the sea salt. Mix until combined.