4 deliciously different picnic ideas. Sausages and sandwiches are great, but if you want to bring something different to your next picnic party, look no further than these tasty bites. From fresh avocado salads to sweet peanut butter squares, our picnic recipes are simple to create and easy to transport. 1. Cheesy ham and asparagus stratas These savoury muffins are a really easy bake, made using bread, eggs, summery asparagus and strong Cheddar. Leave them in the muffin tin to transport them or fashion your own parchment cases to keep them in tact on the way to the picnic blanket. Timings and nutrition Ready in: 55 minutes, plus chilling Cooking time: 30 minutes Prep time: 25 minutes Makes: 12 Each serving provides: 185kcal, 9g fat, 4.4g saturates, 2.1g sugars, 1.06g salt Ingredients 30g unsalted butter 1 leek, thinly sliced 1 loaf stale white bread, crusts cut off and cut into 2.5cm cubes 110g medium strength Cheddar, grated 100g asparagus, blanched and cut into 3cm pieces 120g honey roast ham, roughly chopped 5 medium eggs 240ml semi-skimmed milk 1 tsp mustard powder Method Preheat the oven to 180°C/gas mark 4. Melt the butter over a medium heat. Add the leek and cook until soft, then allow to cool. In a large bowl, mix the cooked leek with the bread, cheese, asparagus and ham. Whisk the remaining ingredients together in another bowl, then gently fold into the bread mix. Cut squares of baking parchment (with pinking shears if you have them, for a decorative effect) and use to line a 12-hole muffin tin. Spoon in the strata mixture, then cover the tray with clingfilm. Chill for 30 minutes. Remove the clingfilm and bake the strata for 25-30 minutes until golden. Serve warm or cold. 2. LA-style summer green salad Every picnic needs a hearty salad and this one is packed with healthy green lentils, watercress and avocado. Top with a zesty lemon and natural yogurt dressing. For easy transport, pop it in a plastic tub with the dressing separate to keep it crisp. Timings and nutrition Ready in: 15 minutes Cooking time: 5 minutes Prep time: 10 minutes Serves: 4 Each serving provides: 288kcal, 15.8g fat, 2.9g saturates, 3.3g sugars, 0.2g salt Ingredients 1 tbsp olive oil ½ tsp ground cumin 1 clove garlic, crushed Zest and juice of 1 washed lemon 80g fat-free natural yogurt 1 medium head broccoli, broken into florets 250g bunch asparagus, trimmed 200g baby leaf watercress, spinach and rocket salad 410g tin green lentils in water, drained and rinsed 1 ripe avocado peeled, destoned and chopped 40g seed mix Method In a small bowl, combine the olive oil, cumin, garlic, lemon zest and juice and natural yogurt. Set aside. Steam the broccoli over a pan of boiling water for 3-4 minutes until just tender. Add the asparagus for the final 2 minutes. Toss together the salad leaves with the asparagus, broccoli, lentils and avocado. Divide between 4 plates, drizzle with the dressing and scatter the seed mix over the top to serve. 3. Broccoli and rosemary pizza Tasty but hardy toppings make this pizza picnic-perfect. Instead of a standard tomato puree, this uses garlic crème fraîche – just add sliced potato, broccoli, red onion and fresh rosemary, then bake before the picnic. Make a delicious DIY base or use a ready-made one to save time. Timings and nutrition Ready in: 35 minutes, plus rising time Cooking time: 20 minutes Prep time: 15 minutes Serves: 4 Each serving provides: 637kcal, 27.4g fat, 12.9g saturates, 6.7g sugars, 1.8g salt Ingredients 500g crusty white bread mix 2 tbsp vegetable oil, plus extra for greasing 14g fresh rosemary, leaves picked and roughly chopped 2 tbsp plain flour, for dusting 2 cloves garlic, finely chopped 120ml reduced fat crème fraîche 1 large potato, peeled and sliced into very thin rounds 1 head broccoli, cut into small florets 1 red onion, cut into wedges 250g mozzarella, drained and sliced Method Put the bread mix in a large bowl with 310ml warm water, 1 tbsp of the oil and half the chopped rosemary. Mix to a dough, then knead on a floured surface for 5-10 minutes, until smooth. Place in another lightly oiled bowl and cover with lightly oiled clingfilm. Leave in a warm place for 1 hour, until it has risen to double its size. Meanwhile, mix the garlic and crème fraîche together in a small bowl. Set aside. Put the potato and broccoli in a microwave-safe bowl with 1 tbsp water, then cover and cook on high for 2-3 minutes. Drain, then add the onion and most of the remaining rosemary. Season with black pepper. Preheat the oven to 220°C/gas mark 7 and place 2 baking sheets in the oven to heat up. Knead the dough for a minute, then divide into 2. On a floured surface, roll out each piece into a large rectangle. Place each dough base on a hot baking sheet, then spoon over the garlic crème fraîche. Scatter over the potato, broccoli and onion mix, then top with the mozzarella and remaining rosemary. Drizzle over the remaining oil and bake for 15-20 minutes, until crisp and golden. 4. Peanut butter and blueberry squares To make these sticky peanut butter bites, mix the ingredients warm in a pan and cut into squares to cool. Made with oats, peanuts and blueberries, they’re a nice treat and can be easily stacked in a tub for the journey. Timings and nutrition Ready in: 15 minutes, plus cooling time Cooking time: 5 minutes Prep time: 10 minutes Makes: 16 squares Each serving provides: 138kcal, 5.4g fat, 2.2g saturates, 11.5g sugars, 0.18g salt Ingredients 50g smooth peanut butter 50g unsalted English butter 200g marshmallows 60g porridge oats 75g dried blueberries 30g dry roasted peanuts, roughly chopped 75g cornflakes Method Line a 20cm square cake tin with clingfilm. Put the peanut butter, butter and marshmallows in a large saucepan. Warm over a low heat, stirring until melted. Remove the pan from the heat. Add the oats, dried blueberries, peanuts and cornflakes to the melted butter mix in the pan, and mix well until combined. Spoon the mixture into the lined tin, and press down to flatten. Chill in the fridge for 1 hour until set. Cut into 16 squares before serving. These recipes are from Sainsbury’s homemadebyyou.co.uk