5 Halloween inspired mocktail recipes. Are you looking to get into the Halloween spirit but without the alcohol? Cutting down or cutting out alcohol, whether for health or personal reasons, doesn’t have to mean you can’t still get experimental around holidays. With the spooky season soon approaching, here are some Halloween inspired mocktail recipes that can make any evening drink feel a little more frightful. Dracula’s Blood Punch recipe Looking for something with a little bit of a bite to it? Dracula’s Blood Punch not only packs a punch, but also has an element of spice to really get the party started and the tastebuds activated. Serves: 12 glasses Prep: 10 minutes Cook: 5 minutes Chill: 4 hours Ingredients: 2 litres of cherry juice or any similar juice e.g. raspberry Peel from 3x oranges 1 thumb sized red chilli left whole with holes poked in 3 cinnamon sticks 10 cloves (spiced, not garlic – you don’t want to frighten the vampires) 6 slices of ginger Fang sweets to garnish (optional) For an alcoholic option you can add vodka Method: Peel, poke and slice the ingredients that need to be prepared before they are used. Put cherry juice, orange peel, red chilli, cloves and ginger in a saucepan. Simmer the ingredients for 5 minutes and then turn off the heat. Place the saucepan in the fridge to cool for a minimum of 4 hours, or up to 2 days to allow for the flavours to become more intense. (If you are sharing with little children, it is advised to take the chilli out after 2 hours). Once chilled and ready to serve, pour into a big bowl or into individual glasses to be served with a straw. Decorate the bowl or glasses with fang sweets or any Halloween sweets of your choice. Source and image credit from BBC Good Food Scorpion’s Venom Mocktail recipe If you’re short on time and want something simple to make then this Scorpion’s Venom recipe only requires two ingredients yet looks sharp. Serves: 4 glasses Prep: 5 minutes Chill: 1 hour Ingredients: 28g of lemon jelly mixture 1 ½ cups of pineapple juice For an alcoholic option you can add vodka or gin Method: In a large jug add the jelly mixture. Add in one cup of boiling water or the amount specified on the packaging. Add one cup of cold water to the mixture and stir together. Add the pineapple juice and then chill in the fridge for an hour, or until the mixture is cold. Serve in Halloween themed glasses and enjoy. Source and image credit from Culinary Ginger Pumpkin Punch Mocktail recipe There’s nothing quite like getting into the Autumnal atmosphere, and what better way to do that than with a pumpkin spiced Halloween mocktail. This recipe can be served warm to help you settle in and relax at the end of the day. Serves: 6 glasses Prep: 10 minutes Cook: 10 minutes Ingredients: 2x cups of apple juice 2x cups of orange juice Orange zest 1x cup of pureed pumpkin 4x tablespoons of maple syrup Mulling spices or cloves Method: You can either buy already pureed pumpkin or you can do this yourself at home. If you’re doing this yourself, you’ll need to peel and dice approx. one half of a pumpkin. Boil in water for approximately 30 minutes. Once soft, drain water and add pumpkin to a blender or food processor. Mix until pureed. Whisk together the apple juice, orange juice, orange zest and the pureed pumpkin. Once whisked pour into a pan on the hob and cook through on a medium to low heat. Add in the maple syrup to the mixture and stir thoroughly. Place spices or cloves into a cheesecloth and add to the pan. Heat through for 10 minutes. Don’t allow the mixture to boil. Remove the cheesecloth with spices and serve hot. Gin and Terror Mocktail recipe The title of this one might suggest that you’ll be adding alcohol to the recipe, but this one plays a little trick as the gin is non-alcoholic gin. The perfect drink for those who prefer something bitter and without as much experimenting as some of the others. Serves: 6 glasses Prep: 10 minutes Cook: 10 minutes Ingredients: 2x shots of non-alcoholic gin ¾ glass of tonic (you can go for normal tonic or a flavoured version like elderflower) 1x lime, quartered Method: Pour the non-alcolic gin into a Halloween themes glass – we suggest a skull glass Squeeze in the juice from 2x quarters of the lime Add in the tonic water and some ice cubes Squeeze in the juice of another quarter of lime Mix the drink all together and serve with a lime wedge & spider on the side Witches Black Sangria recipe This sangria recipe is perfect for those who like to live (and drink) deliciously, as it’s full of flavour and fruit and looks spooky. You can easily adapt this Halloween mocktail recipe to be served warm or cold depending on the spell you’re creating. Serves: 6 glasses Prep: 10 minutes Chill: 1 hour Ingredients: 1x bottle of non-alcoholic red wine or 750ml of blackberry juice 2x cups of blackberries 4x black plums, chopped 2x cups of black grapes, halved or whole 1x cup sparkling water Method: Add all ingredients into a large bowl or saucepan (if you’re heating up) and stir thoroughly. For chilled just put in the fridge to cool for atleast one hour – the longer you leave it the darker the plums will become. If you’re serving hot you can warm through on the stove at a medium to low heat for 10 minutes and then serve. If you really want to add a dramatic effect to this drink, you can top it with some dry ice. Source and image credit from Sugar and Charm Looking for something you can serve alongside your Halloween mocktails? Why not create a DIY Toffee Apple station which is fun for the whole family! As a Vitality member, you could get up to 25% cashback on Waitrose & Partners Good Health food when you get active. If you have a second eligible health insurance or life insurance plan, you could get up to 40% cashback. Excludes beverages. Log in to Member Zone for the details.