5 moves that should be in your routine. Are you an occasional exerciser or a fitness fanatic? Regardless of your ability, these are five bodyweight exercises that are great to build into your routine. Developed by Virgin Active Master Personal Trainer, Tom Atkinson , the five exercises will give your whole body a workout and boost your strength. Follow the descriptions, illustrations and How-To videos below to perfect your technique so that you get the most from the move – whether you are starting from scratch and getting yourself gym-ready, or just want to incorporate some news equipment-free moves into your routine. How to: 1. Superman Plank Mix up your plank with this dynamic variation; challenge your core stability and balance too! Start in a full plank with your hands flat on the ground and your legs outstretched, staying on your toes. Make sure your hips are in line with the rest of your body, and then raise one arm and the opposing leg off the ground. Squeeze your abs and glutes for stability and hold for a few seconds before changing sides. 2. Frog Squat This squat variation gets the quadriceps firing in no time. It can be used as a part of a warm-up prior to a heavy leg session or as an option of bodyweight squats. Start low down in a squat position and place your elbows between your knees. Raise your hips so that you feel a stretch in your hamstrings, then sit back down into your start position. Try to complete as many reps as you can in one minute! 3. Mountain Climber The move that does it all! Not only does it work the lower body and core, but it is also a great cardio workout too! Start in a standard pushup position, with one knee brought forward so that it is line with your extended arms. Now, in one movement, you are going to jump and swap your legs’ position, so that the one that was brought in goes back, and the one that was extended is brought in. Repeat this for as long as you can – you’ll be surprised at how quickly you start to sweat! 4. Diamond-grip Pushup Diamond grip push-ups will put a lot more tension on your triceps than regular push-ups. So they’re a great movement to throw into an arms workout! Begin in a standard push-up position, then bring your hands together so that your thumbs and fingers meet, creating a diamond shape. Lower yourself down as you would with a push-up and then drive your body back up, using your triceps to power the movement. 5. Jump Lunge The jump lunge is a great, dynamic movement which will help strengthen the lower body and improve cardiovascular fitness. To perform this movement, step forward and drop your back knee towards the ground, stretching out through the quadricep and hip-flexor to create a static lunge. Explode off the ground and switch your legs before landing in the same position with the other leg now in front. Make sure to keep your chest up and abs tight as you repeat for reps! Join Virgin Active Get discounted gym membership at Virgin Active with Vitality*. A joining fee will apply. Find out more *Selected Vitality products only. Minimum monthly premiums and terms and conditions apply.