5 reasons why women should give football a go. Published: 8 August 2022. Written by: Becky Bargh. With everyone talking about women’s football, we explore why the sport ticks all the boxes for women’s health Football in England has come a long way since its inception more than 130 years ago. The game has risen to become the most popular sport played in the UK, with more than 100 teams to support through the leagues. Historically, however, football has predominately been a man’s world – women were even banned from playing it for 51 years ! But thankfully the spotlight is now well and truly on the women’s game. So, what are the specific health benefits for women who get involved in football? We ask the Vitality experts to explain why football is the ideal sport for women to get a kick out of. 1. Building strength and fitness The average professional footballer runs around 7 miles in one game, while referees can cover between six and eight miles over the 90 minutes, according to Runners World . Football is, therefore, an ideal sport to ­– not only increase your step count – but to activate your muscles and get the blood pumping. ﻿ “The combination of jumping, sprinting, slower bouts of running, changes of direction and kicking class football as both an ‘aerobic activity and anaerobic activity’, which means that you breathe harder and faster and also improve strength at the muscle,” explains Jonny Kibble, Vitality’s Head of Exercise & Physical Activity. 2. Increase bone mineral density Women are at greater risk of osteoporosis and osteopenia – low bone density not yet in the osteoporosis range – due to having smaller and less dense bones, when compared with men. And this risk only increases with age, particularly during the menopause. “This is because the female hormone oestrogen – which is essential for healthy bones – often falls during menopause, leading to a rapid decrease in bone density,” says Kibble. So, it’s incredibly important for women to build their bone mineral density to future-proof them from a diagnosis later in life. Vitality’s private health insurance includes access to a range of menopause support services. These include: An online information hub with links to articles and resources Personalised, app-based care Onward referral for certain treatments, if required. And football, according to Kibble, can be a “powerful” tool in safeguarding from osteoporosis. “Sprinting and jumping during a game helps to combat this, ensuring that your bones and muscles have maximum strength,” he explains. “Reaching and tackling in football also greatly improves mobility and flexibility, which can help against the effects of ageing.” 3. It’s really accessible Football is really accessible as not much equipment is required. Needing just a ball to play and something to act as a goal post, a jumper or item of clothing will suffice if you’ve not got something sturdy, then you’re good to go. And that means it’s an ideal sport for any age to get involved, “as long as it’s played sensibly,” notes Kibble. Science-backed wats to lift and look after your heart health Footballer and pundit Alex Scott talks her proudest moments and the future of women’s football How to stay fit with the whole family at every age Meanwhile, picking up an athletic sport that can be fast paced and technical for the first time can be intimidating. But starting is the biggest hurdle to overcome. “Playing doesn’t have to be with a competitive team either, it could just be playing in the park with friends or on your own in the garden,” he adds. 4. It has mental health benefits Physical activity is known to release endorphins, which gives us that ‘feel-good factor’. This can contribute to improved self-esteem and, as findings by Healthline shows, the release of endorphins acts as a blocker to pain. “Aside from the physical element, football can have a huge impact on our mental health and wellbeing too,” says Belinda Sidhu, Vitality’s Head of Mental Health & Wellbeing. “As a team-based sport, it could help boost self-confidence and increase motivation. “It’s also a social sport and doesn’t have to be with a competitive team either; even just playing in the park with friends or on your own in the garden can have an impact on our mood, and in turn our health. “Playing with others can also help our social wellbeing and combat feeling of loneliness.” 5. Improves cardiovascular health Ramping up your heart rate during exercise trains the body to move oxygen and blood to the muscles more efficiently. And by improving the heart’s cardiovascular health in this way, you can reduce your risks of some nasty diagnosis. “[Football] can help to reduce the risk of certain chronic illnesses, such as heart disease, a stroke and type 2 diabetes,” explains Kibble. So, if running solo isn’t for you, a jog around a football pitch is a great place to ensure you are upping your heart rate. As a Vitality member, you could get partner benefits and rewards with a range of big brands. Available with qualifying health insurance , life insurance and investment plans. Log into Member Zone for the details. Fitness Football