5 ways to kickstart your gym routine. There’s no better time than the present to start improving your fitness regime. If you’ve been thinking about joining a gym or working out more often, Virgin Active Personal Trainer Emily Cole has some helpful tips on how to kickstart your gym routine. Vary your workout Let’s face it, doing the same old routine every time you hit the gym can be a tad tedious, which may lead to a negative association with exercise. Not only that, but your body quickly adapts to training and without variation you’ll stop seeing results – running on the treadmill or slogging it out on the cross-trainer can be a thing of the past. Try High Intensity Interval Training (HIIT) or circuit training, which are great for fat burning, or incorporate weight training into your cardio workout. Get yourself a Personal Trainer Hiring a Personal Trainer could give you that boost of motivation you need to kickstart your gym routine this year. Having someone on hand to support and encourage you during and outside of your sessions will help you to stay on track and achieve your fitness goals, whatever they may be. A Personal Trainer will plan programs specific to your needs, correct form and technique, give you new ideas, challenge you, provide nutritional advice and believe it or not, might actually make that hour in the gym enjoyable. Set yourself a goal Setting yourself a goal will give you a reason to get down the gym. If you have nothing to aim for, you will be more likely to ditch training sessions in favour of going to the pub after work or sitting on the sofa with a box of chocolates (both enjoyable pastimes, but not ideal for the waistline!). Having a target, whether it’s to run a marathon or simply lose a few pounds, will offer direction, focus and motivation, which will guarantee results quicker. Try a group class Struggling to motivate yourself in the gym? Give a group exercise class a go. They offer safe and effective workouts that are sure to challenge you and push you harder than if you were training alone. Classes also create a fun, social atmosphere that will keep you interested and engaged, and give you ideas to take away and put into practice in your own sessions. Feeling apprehensive about going alone? Drag a friend along with you – they’ll thank you for it later! Virgin Active offers a range of classes that are fun and effective. Make a playlist So now that you’re ready to kick-start your New Year routine, here’s one final tip that will take your training to the next level – make yourself a playlist. Music has been proven to enhance your workout for a number of reasons. Firstly it distracts you from those feelings of fatigue, which means you will be able to push yourself harder during your session – leaving you able to do more repetitions, lift heavier weights or perform for longer and burn more calories. Choosing songs you enjoy listening to has also been proven to put you in a better mood, releasing hormones that get you ‘in the zone’ and ready for your workout. Plug in, press play and get pumped! Need some help sticking to your resolutions? Read tips from psychologist Stacey Levine. Join Virgin Active Get discounted gym membership at Virgin Active with Vitality*. A joining fee will apply. Find out more *Selected Vitality products only. Minimum monthly premiums and terms and conditions apply. Gym Workouts