5 winning mocktails for every sunny (or rainy) occasion. Published: 27 May 2021. Written by: Tatiana Mercer. Drinks innovator, Three Spirit co-founder and former spirits critic Tatiana Mercer, takes us through her must-make non-alcoholic cocktails this summer, so whatever the occasion you’ve got a mocktail recipe that packs a punch. With beer gardens buzzing, and the diary rapidly filling up with social events for the months ahead, drinking with friends is back on the agenda. However, research from Sheffield University suggests that the pandemic has changed our attitude to alcohol, with many of us drinking less than during the previous year. The good news? Long gone are the days where mocktails were a fruit juice-based afterthought. Whether you’re sober-curious or becoming a more mindful drinker , the latest non-alcoholic options are changing the game. From alcohol-free beers and sparkling wines to innovative non-alcoholic spirits, we’re shaking up mocktails for every occasion – all best served with a side of sunshine. For picnic sundowners: Summer Session Highball Tangy, quick and simple to make. This complex highball with aromatic and herbaceous top notes, balanced with crisp sweetness from the apple juice, is the ultimate evening companion as the sun sets. Blankets might be required… You’ll need: 50ml pressed apple juice 200ml Sekforde Sicilian Orange, Rosemary & Gentian Mixer Angostura bitters Slice of apple What to do: Fill a highball glass with ice and pour in the apple juice. Add the Sekforde Sicilian Orange, Rosemary & Gentian soda. Add three dashes of Angostura bitters and give it a quick stir. Garnish with a slice of apple to serve. For the boozeless brunch: Breakfast Mar-tea-ni Breakfast martinis without the hangover, for that perfectly chilled, 007-inspired start to your day. We’re sold! You’ll need: 15ml marmalade syrup (see below) 50ml Seedlip Grove 42 15ml fresh chilled lemon juice 20ml fresh chilled orange juice 75ml REAL Royal Flush kombucha What to do: For the syrup, add two heaped tablespoons of marmalade and 50ml water to a pan. Heat while stirring occasionally until the marmalade has melted. Leave to cool, decant and store in the fridge. Blend all the ingredients except the kombucha for 5 seconds to mix and aerate. If you don’t have a blender, dry-shake in a cocktail shaker. Pour into a coupe of wine glass, and slowly top with the kombucha. Garnish with dried edible tea leaves if you wish! For the sunlounger: The Garden of Tropics The sun’s out (hopefully), you’re transporting yourself to foreign climes and a mocktail is calling. This is simple to make so you can get back to your sunlounger in no time. You’ll need: 100ml pineapple juice 200ml Sekforde Lime, Mint & Cacao Mixer Half a lemon Sprig of mint What to do: Take a highball glass and add ice. Pour in the pineapple juice. Add the Sekforde Lime, Mint & Cacao soda and a squeeze of lemon. Stir and serve with a sprig of mint. For pre-dinner mocktail hour: The Summer Spritz Sharp, refreshing and a brilliant apéritif thirst-quencher to serve guests. You’ll need: 50ml Æcorn Bitter 200ml Fever-Tree Italian Blood Orange Soda Sliced lemon or orange, to serve What to do: Pour the Æcorn Bitter over ice in a wine or highball glass. Top with Fever-Tree Italian Blood Orange Soda and garnish with your choice of citrus. To kickstart the weekend: Golden Days Beer Cocktail It’s finally the weekend – beer-o-clock with an added kick – and this is guaranteed to jumpstart your Friday evening. You’ll need: A shot of ginger juice Top up with alcohol-free beer (we like Big Drop lager) Spritz of orange blossom water (optional) Orange slice What to do: In a tumbler, add the ginger juice. Top up with your choice of alcohol-free beer. Spritz in one spray of orange blossom water and serve with a slice of orange. In the mood for more mocktails? Try these 3 tasty concoctions at home As a Vitality member, you could get partner benefits and rewards with a range of big brands. Available with qualifying health insurance , life insurance and investment plans. Log in to Member Zone for the details.