6 Ways Vitality Can Provide Mental Health Support. Published: 14 May 2019. From talking therapy to mental health forums, here are the smart ways that Vitality can support your happiness and wellbeing. Struggling to switch off before bed? Regularly feeling anxious and overwhelmed? Just not feeling ‘yourself’? One in four people in the UK experiences a mental health issue each year, yet only one-third of people seek support. Read on to find out the new ways Vitality can help eligible members… 1. Access to mindfulness tools As a Vitality member you could get a 6-month subscription to Headspace, available to members with health and life insurance plans. This gives users access to hundreds of guided meditations on subjects including sleep, focus and exercise. This is available through Vitality’s Healthy Mind offering – over 20,000 members have already clocked up 200,000 mindfulness app sessions in the past six months. Plus, you can earn Vitality points for meditating. You can use Headspace or other mindfulness apps. Science says: Meditation has been scientifically proven to help alleviate stress after just eight weeks of regular practice. 2. Guided online therapy Via Vitality’s mental health partner, Togetherall , Vitality Health members can access online counselling support with  counsellors and Cognitive Behavioural Therapists. This can be effective support for anxiety, depression, stress and trauma. You can easily book sessions and choose your therapist. They take place via text, audio or secure video, and there are mental health forums as an added support network. Science says: One advantage of online therapy is the disinhibition effect – where we feel more comfortable opening up and discussing problems when they are online. 3. Face-to-face counselling sessions If you’d rather visit a therapist, Vitality offers eight talking therapy sessions with Core Cover and unlimited sessions with Mental Health Cover for Vitality Health members. You can choose between counsellors or Cognitive Behavioural Therapist (effective for challenging negative thoughts and behaviours), depending on your needs. Science says: 1.4 million people were referred to talking therapy in 2017 , with 65% of people showing significant improvements to their mental health and wellbeing after treatment. 4. Mental health workshops at work With work-related stress or anxiety accounting for over half of all working days lost , opening up about our mental health and wellbeing in the workplace is a no-brainer. Vitality Health members offers access to interactive workshops which can be held in your office for up to 20 employees and focus on topics such as mental health first aid and spotting problem signs. Science says: Only 53% of employees feel comfortable talking about their mental health , yet research shows that addressing wellbeing at work increases productivity by as much as 12%. 5. Discount on stays at Champneys Having some downtime is a key part of a well-balanced lifestyle. That’s why Vitality offers up to 75% off one, two or three night stays at Champneys Health Spas. During the stay, they offer everything from exercise classes to bike hire, access to nutritionists and spa therapists – book via the Member Zone for some well-deserved R and R. Science says: There are countless benefits of properly ‘unplugging’ and getting away from it all. Being able to truly relax and rest has been shown to boost productivity and reduce the long-term risks of bigger health problems such as heart disease. 6. In or out-patient mental health treatment If you’re in need of treatment with a clinical expert such as a psychologist, Vitality’s Mental Health Cover can support you – they can also cover hospital stays for more severe mental health conditions. If you’re ever worried or concerned about your mental health, see your GP. As a Vitality member, you could get partner benefits and rewards with a range of big brands. Available with qualifying health insurance , life insurance and investment plans. Log in to Member Zone for the details. Mental Health Mindfulness Talking Therapy