7 Blissful UK Spa Breaks With A Difference. Love to relax but want to try something new? From awe-inspiring falconry to test-driving sports cars, we’ve found the most exciting spa breaks you’ll want to book now. The health benefits of taking a spa break are plentiful, and it’s the perfect excuse for a bit of you-time. But did you know that some UK spas offer much more than treatments and hot tubs? Travel writer Joanna Booth shares seven of her favourite spas that’ll surprise you with amazing experiences to help you reset and re-energise. Enjoy… 1. Fly a falcon at Eastwell Manor As well as a sumptuous spa with a host of treatments and fitness classes, this elegant manor house hotel hosts unforgettable falconry experiences. You’ll have the chance to get hands-on with the beautiful birds of prey, flying them over the gorgeous Kentish countryside with an experienced guide. Follow it with dinner at the Table d’Hôte restaurant overlooking the grounds. 2. Take a tandem picnic at Coworth Park Explore Coworth Park’s 240-acre grounds together on one of their new tandem bikes. Strap a champagne picnic to your pannier and make sure you’ve booked a treatment to loosen tired leg muscles at the award-winning spa afterwards. The hotel also has an on-site equestrian centre if you fancy a spot of horse-riding. 3. Soak up salt therapy at Gilpin Lake House Looking to clear away the cobwebs? Try a salt therapy treatment at The Gilpin Hotel’s Lake House. The Lake District hotel offers a private jetty spa with salt-based halotherapy, massages and scrubs, all overlooking the serene woodland lake. Then swap your bathrobe for wellies and head out on a walking trail, take a swim in the lake or try out one of the rowing boats. 4. Get sporty at Champneys Tring This elegant Champneys spa is great for an energising retreat. With on-site tennis courts, table tennis and mountain bikes for hire at no extra cost, you can balance treatments and chilling in the Thalassotherapy pool with being active. With over 20 fitness classes daily – from yoga to HIIT classes – you can take your pick, while Tring has plenty of surrounding bike trails if you want to venture further. 5. Learn outdoor pursuits at Gleneagles There are so many pursuits to try at this amazing Scottish estate, from clay shooting to fishing. If you want to immerse yourself in the local wildlife, try one of their photography master classes. You’ll explore the Perthshire hills with a pro cameraman to capture the perfect shots of the local deer and birds of prey. Back at the hotel, roaring fires and a cosy spa awaits. 6. Join the Swim Club at Watergate Bay Whether you want to learn to swim or you’re looking to perfect your stroke, Watergate Bay’s two-day swim clinics with a professional coach will help you achieve your goal. The coastal hotel is set on one of Cornwall’s best surfing beaches with a sea-view pool, Canadian hot tub and fitness classes on the sand. Bliss. Photo: Luke Hayes 7. See Snowdonia by sports car at Lake Vyrnwy Hotel This lakeside country house has an amazing thermal spa, but its best feature is the many activities on offer. If you want to explore the Welsh mountain panoramas in style, the hotel partners with a sports car hire specialist so you can put an Aston Martin, Maserati or McLaren through its paces before your pampering. It’s perfect for both fast and slow adventures. Don’t forget, Vitality members can get up to 75% off one, two and three-night Champneys Spa Stays .