7 reasons why you might not be losing weight. Do you feel like you are doing all the right things but don’t seem to be shifting any weight? Here are 7 common mistakes that could be getting in the way of your weight loss goals. 1. Eating the ‘wrong kind’ of low-fat food But if it’s low-or-no-fat, it’s good, yes? Well, not always, no. Manufacturers often replace fat with sugar, salt and chemical-laden additives that can leave you hungry for more. Culprits include crisps, peanut butter, cheese and yoghurt. Even the packaging can work against your intention to cut down: a study by the Cornell University Food and Brand Lab found that consumers eat a lot more than they usually would if they’ve seen ‘low-fat’ on the label. Our advice: Always read the labels, use the real thing, but don’t use so much of it! 2. Shopping when you’re hungry Supermarkets put a lot of time and money into enticing us to buy more than we planned to when we started shopping. If you can make a list first – and try to put only healthy food options on it – and then stick to it, that’s one way to get out of there in good shape. Another is to eat something before you even start shopping. An academic study in the US asked a large group of adults to eat nothing for several hours, then set them all loose in a food store – but gave some of them a snack beforehand. The non-snackers purchased 19% more food than the snackers… Our advice: Don’t go shopping on an empty stomach. 3. Eating salad Hang on, we’ll rephrase that: it’s a mistake for people who would like to lose a bit of weight to eat only salad at mealtimes. This isn’t because those leaves aren’t low in calories – they are – but because our brains usually tell our bodies to keep filling up unless we put some carbohydrates in there too. Our advice: Carbs needn’t steer you off your low-calorie course either: try adding fruit, wholemeal pasta or bread to that salad or sandwich. 4. Changing what you eat but not your lifestyle There’s nothing wrong or unhealthy about a planned, balanced diet – on the contrary, weight-loss will be good for your heart and blood pressure as well as your waistline. But if you want to keep off the weight you lose, dieting alone might not be enough. The journal American Psychologist reviewed a large number of long-term studies that all suggested diets stopped working once the dieters had lost up to 10 per cent of their weight. Hardly any dieters kept their weight-loss after six months, and in the long run, most of them put the weight back on. Our advice: It’s not enough to have a diet plan alone – we also need to rethink our lifestyles and our approach to exercise. 5. Setting unrealistic goals When researchers in Canada tracked the progress of over a thousand men and women who had signed up for a weight loss programme, they found almost half of the participants dropped out before they’d achieved new, lower weight levels that they would be able to sustain afterwards. This wasn’t because the programme wasn’t a good one – it involved regular sessions with doctors and nutritionists – so what went wrong for so many people? Dr Daniel Birch, who helped run the study with researchers from the University of Alberta and the Royal Alexandra Hospital in Edmonton, thinks the answer lies in setting unrealistic targets at the start, then getting frustrated when they’re not hit. “The number one lesson for anyone is to manage your expectations,” says Dr. Birch. “People are after dramatic, rapid weight drop and usually, that just isn’t going to happen.” Our advice: Accept there may not be an easy fix, be realistic about what can be achieved and take your time achieving it. 6. Skipping breakfast Research published in the journal Nutrition suggests that eating a big breakfast in order not to be hungry later in the day doesn’t really work. This is because we still go on and consume as many calories during the rest of the day as we would have normally. However you shouldn’t skip breakfast – if you do, studies suggest that you’re more likely to reach for a mid-morning snack, and that might be far unhealthier than having breakfast. Our advice: Have a well balanced, healthy breakfast, such as porridge, that will help set you up for the rest of the day. 7. Putting less on your plate, but the same amount in your glass A study published in the Journal of Clinical Nutrition says we can all cut a lot of calories from our diet by thinking about what soft drinks we’re drinking. Dr Caballero, professor of nutrition at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, explains that we’ve all increased our average daily calorie intake over the last 20 years – and surprisingly, “almost half that increase is explained by an increase in consumption of calorific beverages.” Our advice: If sticking to water sounds a bit boring, at least try to keep an eye on how often you reach for a fizzy alternative.