7 ways to look after your mental health with a mindful spring-clean. Published: 18 March. Written by: Hattie Parish. Spring cleaning doesn’t have to be limited to your overcrowded cupboards. As we shake off winter, it’s worth considering some small changes you can make to help your mental health see a positive blossom. Spring always brings a sense of hope as the days get longer and warmer, and all around us there are signs of brighter days. ‘Spring is a time for change,’ says Belinda Sidhu, Head of Mental Health and Wellbeing at Vitality. ‘When we look around us, the weather is changing; the trees begin to sprout their leaves; plants and flowers begin to grow and blossom. We can use this time to help ourselves blossom, too.’ Rather than a complete overhaul, the key to sustainable and healthy change is baby steps. ‘Starting small with tiny habits and slowly building them up can lead to long-lasting change,’ says Sidhu. So, here are seven simple ways to help your mental health journey this spring… 1. Top up on vitamin D You might have heard vitamin D referred to as the ‘sunshine vitamin’, because not only do we make it from sunlight, but vitamin D can help improve mood, and negative feelings and emotions . While we do begin to see more sunshine in spring, for many people it’s still a good idea to get extra vitamin D, or tweak your diet to include more foods containing vitamin D. ‘We can get some vitamin D from our diet through oily fish such as salmon, mackerel, sardines and herring, as well as eggs and foods fortified with it, such as breakfast cereals,’ says Ryan James, Vitality Health and Wellbeing Advisor. ‘You might be less likely to absorb enough vitamin D from the sun if you live in an area with high pollution, spend most of your time indoors, or have darker skin,’ says Sidhu. If you do choose to take a supplement, she advises tacking it on to another part of your routine: ‘You could place the bottle next to your cereal to remind you to take it with breakfast.’ 2. Get set for sleep The clocks going forward at the end of March can spell sleep disruption for many. The good news is that with adequate planning, you can head it off. ‘Get into the habit of waking up earlier,’ says Sidhu. ‘Start slowly by setting your alarm clock a little earlier each day – and why not use that extra time for something that brings you joy; perhaps a morning mindfulness session or a walk.’ Sleep hygiene is also important as the days get longer and lighter earlier – Sidhu suggests investing in some blackout curtains and removing any light pollution – such as devices – from your bedroom. 3. Go with your gut A winter of seasonal bugs may have left your gut in need of some love. As well as its role in digestion, gut health is linked to our immunity and mental wellbeing , so it’s crucial you look after it. ‘One of the easiest ways to improve our gut health is through diet,’ says James. Replenish friendly gut bacteria with probiotics – ‘strains of live bacteria and yeast that aim to reach the gut and benefit the host. Probiotics can be found in fermented foods such as sauerkraut, kimchi, kefir, tempeh, olives and yoghurt.’ Then feed those bacteria with prebiotics. ‘These can be obtained from dietary fibres that can be found in a range of fruits, vegetables and wholegrains, including asparagus, onions, leeks, garlic, chicory root, bananas, yams, beans and whole wheat.’ 4. Take it outside It’s well documented that nature has huge benefits for our wellbeing, from reducing stress and anxiety to easing muscle tension and reducing blood pressure. ‘In one study , it was found that those who strolled for just 20 minutes within a park or woodland reported significantly more stress relief than those who strolled in a city centre,’ says Sidhu. With nature bursting into life in spring, there’s no better time to enjoy it. ‘Build a simple habit into your routine, like a stroll in the morning before work, at lunchtime or after work. You could also practise mindfulness on your walks, to help ground you and bring you back to the here and now, or a spot of morning yoga in the garden.’ 5. Stretch your green thumb It seems everyone’s getting an allotment these days – during the pandemic, applications soared by up to 300% in certain areas – and for good reason, too. Not only are they a purse-friendly way to load up on fresh veg, but gardening is also beneficial to both mental and physical health. ‘A report in the Mental Health Journal referred to gardening as being able to reduce stress and improve mood,’ says Sidhu. Gardening can also contribute to NEAT – non-exercise activity thermogenesis. ‘This means activities that utilise energy that aren’t specifically exercise,’ says Jonathan Kibble, Head of Exercise & Physical Activity at Vitality. 6. Eat with the seasons Spring brings a bounty of nutrient-rich fruit and veg. ‘Asparagus, broad beans, radishes, spring onions, leeks and rhubarb are just some that come into season during spring,’ says James. Eating a variety will provide you with a broad range of vitamins and minerals. ‘The benefits of eating seasonally include the quality of the produce, and greater flavour,’ says James. ‘The price tends to be cheaper, and if you are looking to eat more sustainably, then eating seasonally will also help you to achieve this.’ Add seasonal foods to your meals by making a few simple tweaks – ‘ stir some spring onions through mashed potato, for example, and add beans and leeks to curries, casseroles and stews’. 7. Free your fitness As the weather warms up, head outside to work out. ‘You can do anything outdoors! Instead of running on a treadmill, take to the streets; move your cycling from the trainer to an outdoor bike; and change your gym work to bodyweight activities in the park – all great options,’ says Kibble. Events start to pick up in springtime too, so consider signing up for a race. ‘Taking exercise outdoors has many benefits, such as increased vitamin D, exploring new places and engaging yourself cognitively as you watch the world go by.’ It’s important to build this into your existing routine, says Kibble. ‘Plan it along with other activities you complete on an average week to make it seem like less of an “extra thing” you have to do. Spending family time on a long weekend walk is a great example.’ As a Vitality member, you could get partner benefits and rewards with a range of big brands. Available with qualifying health insurance , life insurance and investment plans. Log in to the Member Zone for the details.