8 London hotels to take your capital city break to the next level. Published: 14 September 2021. Written in collaboration with Mr & Mrs Smith. With green, amber, and red travel lists changing almost daily, UK staycations are becoming more and more appealing. Avid travellers who would usually be catching flights abroad are exploring corners of the UK they never knew existed and falling back in love with cities where their lust for experiencing epic places once began. With some help from the hospitality experts at Mr & Mrs Smith , we’ve put together a list of London’s best hotels to ensure you experience the capital like you never have before. Henrietta Hotel Henrietta Hotel is set in two elegant townhouses within nosying distance of Covent Garden – they’ve called on a dream team. A French designer with a bold sensibility, drinks historians with a taste for the curious and the chef du jour. Prices starts from £195.50, and you’ll get Two free cocktails from the bar a stay and VIP access to the Experimental Cocktail Club’s bars. Highlights: Oh-so central setting Historic townhouses A dash of French whimsy The Franklin The Franklin is Anouska Hempel in hotel form: refined and ravishing in equal measures. Like its sister, Blakes, the hotel riffs on foreign lands (in this case: Italy). Prices starts from £270, and you’ll get a £50 hotel credit to spend onsite. Highlights: Anouska Hempel design Italian fine dining Quiet, central location Artist Residence London Artist Residence London has a colourful palette and a creative mindset, with bespoke furnishings in shabby-chic rooms, a cool and cultured bar and a lively eatery, all housed in a prim central London townhouse. Prices starts from £95, plus you’ll get a bottle of Bramley hand wash included. Highlights: Coolly creative interiors Brilliant bistro Cultured drinking den The Standard, London Luxury hotel, the Standard, London, in the heart of newly chic King’s Cross, sees America’s coolest hotels (the work of star hotelier André Balazs) finally cross the pond with retro-fabulous rooms and party hard nights. Prices starts from £183, and you’ll also receive a welcome gift, two bottles of water and late check-out till 2pm. Highlights: Super central seat Cali cool with Brit wit Cut-above dining’ Blakes Hotel (reopening in September 2021) Pure modern decadence. Each room at Anouska Hempel’s South Ken boutique pad, Blakes Hotel, has its own style, but all are inspired by far-flung lands: Russia, India, Turkey… Prices starts from £260, and you’ll also get a bottle of Sommelier’s choice wine in your room and Continental breakfast for two throughout your stay. Highlights: Anouska Hempel design Discreet South Kensington address Romantic haute cuisine restaurant Batty Langley’s With the name Batty Langley, you’re destined for great things; the same is true of Batty Langley’ hotel, which delivers Georgian fun and frolics in London’s fashionable Spitalfields. Prices starts from £169, and you’ll also receive a bottle of wine for stays in Club Luxury or Superior Double rooms; prosecco for Deluxe Terrace room and up; Champagne for GoldSmiths. Highlights: Georgian flair Breakfast in bed Prime location NoMad London From the bones of Bow Street Magistrates Court comes a much more inviting visit: The NoMad London, where celebrated design studio Roman and Williams has balanced heritage and vision to create a welcoming and wowing space in the heart of Covent Garden. Prices starts from £332, and you’ll also get two signature NoMad cocktails in your room on arrival. Highlights: Spectacular restaurant atrium Buzzing Side Hustle bar Beautifully appointed suites 11 Cadogan Gardens Hotel & Apartments Occupying a string of townhouses on a leafy Chelsea square, 11 Cadogan Gardens Hotel & Apartments has the body of an aristocrat and the spirit of a bon viveur. Prices starts from £269, and you’ll also get full English breakfast for two; Smiths staying in suites also receive a half bottle of Veuve Clicquot and a free extra bed. Highlights: In the heart of Chelsea Stylish stay-longer apartments Late-night cocktail bar As a Vitality member, you could get up to 25% off luxury and boutique hotels with Mr & Mrs Smith . Available with qualifying health insurance , life insurance and investment plans. A spending cap applies. Log in to Member Zone for the details.