8 Secrets from Britain’s best trainers. Rarely a week goes by where there isn’t a new celebrity-endorsed diet or fitness regime that “you simply must try!” From Beyonce’s vegan diet to Cameron Diaz’s ‘Superhero Workout’, we are always being told what we can do to look like the stars. But what do the personal trainers behind the celebrities actually advise? Vitality has got some top secrets from four of the UK’s most in-demand trainers. JAMES DUIGAN Trainer to Elle Macpherson and Rosie Huntington-Whiteley, Duigan is the bestselling author of The Clean and Lean Diet and in April this year launches a fully interactive web channel with workout videos, motivation and daily tips at cleanandlean.com Tip #1: Drink three cups of green tea a day Green tea contains high levels of antioxidants. It’s a great alternative to coffee and research suggests that three cups a day can boost your immune system and improve your body’s ability to process sugar. One study published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition found that three mugs daily could increase fat-burning metabolism by around 40 per cent. T ip #2: Dry-brush your skin One minute of dry body-brushing every day (you can buy a decent brush from any chemist) before your bath or shower will get your blood pumping. It certainly benefits muscles after exercise by increasing circulation to them. Start at your feet and brush in light sweeps in the direction of your heart but go easy on softer bits such as your stomach or breasts. Use a natural body brush with firm bristles for the best effect – though it shouldn’t hurt, dry brushing should feel quite bracing on the skin. KATHRYN FREELAND She works out Cate Blanchett, Samantha Morton and Matthew Wright and specialises in outdoor routines that require little or no equipment. Freeland is the founder of training company Absolute Fitness and Green Farm Fitness , a luxury boutique wellness and fitness retreat in Kent. T ip #3: Know yourself (and what makes you feel good) Look back at the programmes you’ve abandoned in the past and be honest with yourself. Why did you give them up? Did you not like the people? Were you bored or miserable? Did you dislike working out alone or in a group? If the gym and Weight Watchers works for one person but it makes you feel miserable, don’t do it. Find a diet and exercise programme that makes you feel good and you’re more likely to stick to it. Tip #4: Balance your diet This secret? There is no secret! Avoid crash diets and make sure that all your meals contain a balance of low-to-moderate Glycaemic Index carbohydrates ( here’s a guide), lean proteins such as fish, poultry, eggs, pulses, tofu and red meat (a couple of times a week) along with good fats such as nuts, olives, olive oil and avocado. Avoid sugary and processed foods and have at least two servings of vegetables with lunch and dinner. Keep your diet varied and have a ‘treat’ meal at least once a week. Simple: because there’s no need to complicate a healthy diet. ZANA MORRIS Famous for getting results, Morris trains elite athletes and celebrities including X Factor’s Sarah Jane Crawford. She’s the founder of the award-winning The Library gym and the co-author of a new book, The High Fat Diet Tip #5: Have a breakfast containing protein and good fats Sugary and high carbohydrate breakfasts cause an insulin spike that will result in the release of ghrelin, a hormone that prompts cravings and unnecessary snacking. Ensure your breakfast is based around protein and fat instead. Focus on eggs and avocado, with vegetables or natural unsweetened yoghurt with nuts and berries. Avoid commercial cereals and if you’re having bread, go for dark rye or pumpernickel breads, adding butter and nut-butters instead of jams – because fat slows down the digestion of other foods, meaning you’ll feel fuller for longer. Tip #6: Do one minute of squats every morning Full squats every morning for one minute will not only noticeably increase your fitness levels but also improve muscle tone and aid fat loss, especially from the tummy. The aim is to do as many squats as possible in the 60 seconds. Squats are the king of all exercises, working your entire body. When they’re done with little or no rest for one minute, they work your hamstrings, quads and glutes, resulting in toned legs. They also engage your core, strengthening your stomach and lower back. Stand with your feet hip-width apart. Now squat down as far as you can – as though you’re squatting to sit down in an imaginary chair, ensuring your knees don’t come further forward than your toes. Keep your back straight and gaze forward. Come up by pressing into your ankles with your weight on your heels. Repeat as many times as you can for a minute – each morning. CHRISTOPHER NEWBURY Personal trainer at Vitality partner Virgin Active’s Kensington Classic Collection Club, Chris helps to bulk up rock royalty, including Matt Tuck from Bullet For My Valentine and James McVey of The Vamps. Tip #7: Static and dynamic stretches are crucial Of course, when you’ve completed an intense workout, the bare basics state that you ‘cool down’ and finalise your routine with body specific stretches, in the same area as what you targeted – breathing steadily, deep and controlled through routine. But, ensure that the body is loose and ready to be worked before every exercise too. It’s so important that you don’t approach any set or rep without having awoken the body, triggered the particular muscles you know you’re going to hit directly and that you’re completely ready to do the set or rep. It’s easy to brush this notion off and just go in all guns blazing but not only is it key to avoid injury, but it also helps steady your form. Tip #8: Mix, Vary, Change, Intensify, Repeat! It’s easy to get stuck in a routine with both workout, diet plans and lifestyle so it’s essential that you keep the mind engaged, focused and enjoy every element in your day-to-day set up. No matter what your goal is – losing weight, eating more healthily, preparing for a sporting event – you have to relish and get excited over the future prospects and reaping the rewards along the way until your goals are achieved. It sounds so simple but people come into the gym doing the same old things for months on end and then lose interest when their ideals aren’t reached. It’s the same with people who eat the same things with no variation – they lose sight of their goals because the scales or the mirror isn’t saying what they want them to. You need to spice up every element of your wellbeing to be truly fulfilled. Mix up your exercises by involving free weights, fixed resistance or classes and, just as important, vary your diet so that you enjoy every mouthful and sip. And finally remember: without a solid balance of fitness and nutrition, your goals might not be achieved.