9 active (and affordable) Easter holidays days out. Need some last-minute inspiration? Lifestyle writer and parenting blogger Natalie Ray shares her go-to activities for the Easter holidays that will get everyone active and won’t break the bank The Easter holidays bring brighter weather, long bank holidays and… the need to keep the children entertained. Founder of parenting blog Plutonium Sox , Natalie Ray has 9 budget-friendly ideas that will keep the boredom at bay and get you moving this Easter. 1. Follow a cycling trail A bike ride is the perfect way to fill your lungs with fresh air, get your heart pumping and make the most of nature. Fortunately, there are so many hidden trails around the UK, including gentle woodland rides and mountain biking routes. For the best family-friendly forest and woodland trails, explore the Forestry Commission’s suggested routes. Or plan a ride to a fun destination, whether an outdoor museums or a botanical garden. Cycling charity, Sustrans has the best daytrip ideas. 2. Delve into rock pooling Sneak in an educational experience this Easter by taking the kids rock pooling. All you need is a bucket and net, but make sure to plan your trip around the tides to avoid getting stuck in a tight spot. Compete to see who can find the most exciting sea creatures or take a handbook along to learn as you go. The best beaches tend to be less touristy. The National Trust have rounded up the best ones for watery wildlife. 3. Try bouldering While the weather is getting a little warmer, you can never rely on it. So, it’s good to have an indoor activity to fall back on. The thought of going ‘climbing’ might seem intimidating but bouldering is much gentler. You don’t need any expensive equipment and you go no higher than it’s safe to fall. Make your way up the wall before letting yourself go and landing on the enormous crash mats. Many indoor climbing walls feature a bouldering room. 4. Go on an Easter egg hunt It wouldn’t be Easter without an egg hunt. You could head to one of the 250 Easter egg hunts at National Trust properties around the country. But for families on a tighter budget or with special dietary needs, why not set up your own? Last year, I set up an Easter chocolate hunt around our garden, but you could also use your local park. Hiding and finding the treats also increases everyone’s steps. 5. Set up camp Spring marks the start of the camping season and there are so many camping sites for families. Some are kitted out with play areas or swimming pools, while others even have campfires and special story-telling evenings to help keep the kids entertained. You could even tie your trip in with a family festival or event, whether it’s woodland fun at Elderflower Fields in Sussex or family theatre at Geronimo Festival in Cheshire, both on 25-28 May. Pick something you love and grab your tent. 6. Swing from the treetops If children are over a metre tall, they can take part in the Go Ape Junior experience – a high ropes course hidden in forest canopies across the UK. Kids can walk across wobbly bridges and navigate treetop paths, ending their experience by flying through the air on a zip wire. 7. Throw an Easter picnic Get the children interested in cooking by making a picnic together. Choose and prepare your favourite foods – try our 4 deliciously different picnic ideas – before heading off to a picturesque spot. Team up with friends and family to set up some Easter-themed games for a more playful picnic. Try an Easter egg and spoon or hopping bunny sack race. 8. Admire the spring flowers Getting children out for a walk can be a bit of a chore but it’s always easier if there’s something beautiful to see. There may still be wild daffodils in your local park and spring marks the beginning of bluebell season too, or book to visit a beautiful gardens in bloom. The stunning RHS gardens are now open to the public. 9. Pet some baby animals Make an Easter trip to your local farm and some may allow you to pet the chicks or feed a lamb at this time of year. It’s a great way to teach children the responsibilities that come with looking after animals. Visit the Zoos and Parks website for inspiration. Fresh air and sunshine are great boredom busters and being active is the perfect way to spend quality time together. Enjoy the break! Looking for more ways to get fit as a family? Check out our family fitness blogger’s roundup of fun workouts .