9 ways owning a dog can help you be healthier. We caught up with some inspiring dog-lovers at the RSPCA Big Walkies in partnership with Vitality in Hyde Park to find out how being a dog owner has transformed their lives for the better. There is an overwhelming amount of research that proves looking after a dog is good for your health, from boosting levels of the feel-good hormone oxytocin and helping to stave off colds , to encouraging us to become more social and active . That’s why Vitality teamed up with the RSPCA to bring you Big Walkies , dog walking events (find your nearest one here ) where owners can take the lead, stretch their legs and help raise money for the charity RSPCA. While at the Hyde Park event last month, we met six doggy owners who prove that dogs can help us in so many ways, from helping us through break-ups to encouraging us to lose weight. Who: Lucy Watson, TV personality and campaigner Best friend: German Spitz, Digby 1. They cheer you up “I live on my own and I love coming home after a long day to hang out with Digby. When I’ve had a bad day, he can sense I’m feeling down but he’s always so excited to see me ­­– that’s a real lift.” 2. They help you eat healthier “Before I got Digby I used to eat a lot of rubbish. I put him on a diet of organic dry food with sardines for treats and that made me think more about what I was eating. Now it’s all healthy and vegan food in our kitchen.” Who: Hannah Field, Instagrammer @chutney_muttney Best friends: Mini Dachshunds, Chutney and Branston 3. They help you through break-ups “When I got Chutney I was getting over a very difficult break-up. I almost can’t put into words how much she helped me. Having her encouraged me to get out into the world and meet people at organised dog walks and dog shows. Chutney is very special to me because she gave me the confidence to get on with my life and be the happy person I am today!” Who: Rikke Rosenlund, co-founder of BorrowMyDoggy – a site that enables you to lend out or borrow dogs in the local area @rirosenlund @borrowmydoggy Best friends: Borrowed Labrador, Aston 4. They make exercise more fun “A lot of our doggy borrowers have signed up to find an exercise buddy. One of our lovely London-based borrowers, Sophie, who borrows two local Labradors, shared with us that she sees borrowing dogs as fun exercise. Instead of running on a treadmill at the gym (which can be expensive), she’s running around Richmond Park with two dogs having a great time.” 5. They can help with depression “One of our doggy borrowers shared with us that she signed up to borrowmydoggy.com as she was suffering from depression, Now, thanks to her local doggy match, Minnie, she gets out, has more social contact and feels more mindful and connected.” Who: Rebecca Patton, Instagrammer @huskymika Best friend: Siberian Husky, Mika 6. They can help you lose weight “Mika gives me the motivation to go out on long walks and we’ve also taken up running together, which not only has had a great impact on my health (I’ve lost a stone since having her), but hers too! She’s a strong girl, so even playing tug with her can be a workout ­– my arms feel like jelly afterwards.” 7. They make you pause “Getting out and about with Mika means I can enjoy what this country has to offer. She loves finding mole holes and making me climb up steep hills. It’s also incredibly peaceful. I love to take my camera with us to take pictures of her and the woodland creatures we see along the way.” Who: Jason Ashley, Instagrammer @bluestaffy Best friend: Staffordshire Bull Terrier, Ramsey 8. They push you “Ramsey and I go for long runs together and I think we both push each other to go that little bit faster or further. We’re often wrestling and playing tug of war so I don’t even realise how active we’re being together!” Who: Lindsay Sanders, Instagrammer @brunotheminidachshund Best friend: Mini Dachshund, Bruno 9. They help break the ice “So many people stop us and talk to Bruno so we’re always meeting new people. Bruno has his regular doggy friends who we see on a daily basis and he’s even helped us get to know our neighbours.” If you needed any more reason to get dog walking, sign up for the Big Walkies – a series of group walks and events throughout the country. Find your nearest event here .