Aubergine and squash lasagne with almonds. “This recipe has everything going for it,” says Prue Leith. “Vegan, gluten-free, healthy, delicious, looks good, freezes well, reheats perfectly, and the almonds give a great crisp texture!” Serves: 6 Ingredients: 2 onions, sliced 7 tbsp olive oil plus extra for greasing 2 large garlic cloves, chopped ½ medium red chilli, deseeded and chopped 2 tsp ground coriander 4 tbsp tomato purée 3 x 400g tins chopped tomatoes 150ml hot vegetable stock 1 tsp soft brown sugar salt and pepper to season 1 tbsp parsley, chopped 100g ground almonds 2 large aubergines (about 500g) 1 large butternut squash, peeled, halved lengthways and deseeded 4–5 sprigs of thyme, leaves picked 50g flaked almonds A large handful of basil leaves, chopped, plus extra leaves to garnish Method: Cook the onions in 3 tablespoons of the oil in a saucepan over a medium heat for 8 minutes until collapsed and golden. Add the garlic, chilli and ground coriander. Cook, stirring, for a couple more minutes, then add the tomato purée, tinned tomatoes, stock and sugar. Simmer for 30–40 minutes, uncovered, or until the sauce has reduced and is lovely and thick. Stir every so often. Season to taste and add the parsley and ground almonds. Heat the oven to 200°C/fan 180°C/gas mark 6. Cut the aubergines and squash into long, narrow 5mm (¼ in) thick slices. Brush with the remaining oil, season and lay out on two large baking trays in single layers. Top with the thyme and roast at the top of the oven for 25 minutes, swapping the trays around halfway, until both vegetables are tender and beginning to brown. Oil a 2-litre ovenproof dish (or six smaller dishes to make six mini-lasagnes). Start with the six biggest squash slices, top them with sauce, then add a layer of aubergine, more sauce and so on until you have finished the ingredients. Finish with a sauce layer. Sprinkle with the flaked almonds and chopped basil. Bake for 25 minutes until a skewer will glide easily through the lasagne from top to bottom. Garnish with a sprig of basil before serving. Use a fish slice to serve. TIP: Sweet potatoes would also work well in this recipe instead of the butternut squash. Recipe extracted from My All-Time Favourite Recipes by Prue Leith (£25, Bluebird)