BBQ spare ribs with fennel, carrot and radish slaw. This month, top chef and food writer Myles Williamson is giving us his brilliant BBQ recipes and tips. Serves: 4-6 portions Prepare: 15 minutes, plus marinating, barbecue setup and resting time Cook: 2 hours 30 minutes Ingredients 1kg Pork spare ribs For the marinade 1½ tbsp Hot smoked paprika 2 tsp Mild chilli powder 1½ tsp mustard powder 2 tsp black peppercorns, finely ground 2 tsp flaky sea salt small bottle barbecue sauce (about 250ml) For the slaw 1 Small red cabbage, finely shredded 1 Small carrot, peeled and cut into matchsticks 1 Fennel bulb, finely sliced, fronds reserved 200g Radishes, finely sliced (leaves reserved, if attached) Large bunch parsley, stalks finely chopped, leaves torn 2 tbsp White wine or cider vinegar 6 tbsp Rapeseed oil 1 Orange, zest and about 2 tbsp juice Method 1. Place the ribs in a large, deep baking tray. Mix the spices and salt together, before vigorously rubbing all over the ribs. Cover the tray tightly with foil and then chill for at least 2 hours (you can marinate up to 24 hours ahead). 2. Preheat the oven 150°C, gas mark 2, or if you’re a bit of a barbecue aficionado, you can slow cook the ribs directly on the grill, maintaining a similar temperature to the oven (see our link for a handy ‘how-to’ ). 3. Place the covered tray of ribs in the oven (or add individual ribs directly to the grill, setup for slow cooking) and cook for about 2 hours until you can insert a knife into the meat with ease; set the ribs aside to rest. Pour any resting juices from the baking tray into a small bowl and add the barbecue sauce (the cooked ribs and sauce can be cooled and chilled for up to 3 days). 4. For the slaw, mix all the sliced vegetables and the parsley stalks in a large bowl, season generously with salt and toss through the vinegar; set aside to soften, until ready to serve. Just before serving, mix in the oil, orange zest and juice to taste; season again, if needed. Toss through the parsley leaves, fennel fronds and radish leaves, if using. 5. Generously brush some the sauce over the ribs and grill uncovered, on a medium-hot part of a barbecue, turning and basting every 3-4 minutes, until piping hot and sticky. Serve the slaw alongside. Tip Invest in a good mandolin – preferably a small Japanese one – to quickly and accurately slice all the vegetables for the slaw (or use the slicing attachments on a food processor instead, if you have one).