Beef burgers with grilled guacamole. This month, top chef and food writer Myles Williamson is giving us his brilliant BBQ recipes and tips. Serves: 4 portions Prepare: 15 minutes, plus barbecue setup and resting time Cook: 10 minutes Ingredients 500g Chuck or braising steak, trimmed of excess fat and sinew, freshly minced ( see tip ) 2 tsp Vegetable oil For the garnish 1 Ripe avocado, halved and de-stoned 4 tbsp Natural yogurt 1 Lime, zest and juice 1 Small red onion, ½ finely chopped, ½ finely sliced to serve 1 Red chilli, deseeded and finely chopped Bunch of coriander, stalks finely chopped, leave torn 4 Brioche or whole grain seeded burger buns 2 Ripe tomatoes, thickly sliced, to serve 1 Little gem lettuce, leaves separated, to serve Method 1. Set up your barbecue. If using charcoal, light your barbecue 30-40 minutes ahead of time, let the coals turn ashen and glowing, then bank them to one side. Preheat a covered gas barbecue with the burners set over the highest heat for 10 minutes to get it nice and hot; if your gas barbecue doesn’t have a cooling shelf, leave one burner unlit when preheating and cooking, so that you’ve got a cool spot if everything is get a little too hot. 2. Mix some seasoning through the minced steak and then gently press together (see tips below). Divide and shape into 4 rough patties, about 9cm wide and 1.5cm thick; don’t force the mince together. Place on a baking tray, cover and chill until needed. 3. Remove the burgers from the fridge at least 20 minutes before you plan to cook, to bring them to room temperature. Make a small indentation into the centre of each burger and coat with 2 tsp vegetable oil. Grill uncovered, on hottest part of the barbecue, turning often, until cooked to your liking, about 6-8 minutes for medium-rare or 10 minutes for well done; set aside to rest under foil for 5 minutes. 4. Whilst the burgers cook, make the guacamole. Season the cut sides of the avocado and grill over a high heat for about 2 minutes until charred. Scoop the flesh into a bowl and roughly crush with a fork, mixing through the yogurt, lime zest and juice, chopped onion, chilli, coriander stalks and most of the leaves (reserve a handful, to serve). 5. Cut open the burger buns and then toast on the grill, cut-side down, for about 1 minute. Spread the lettuce, sliced tomato and onion over the bottom buns and top each with one of the rested burgers. Dollop a spoonful of the guacamole over the burgers, add a small handful of the reserved coriander leaves to each and then cover with the top buns. Serve with whole, baked sweet potatoes, or wedges, if liked. Tips – Don’t force the meat together otherwise your burgers will be tough. Keep them quite thin as well, about 1.5cm thick is perfect. – Check the seasoning of the patties by frying off a small pinch, tasting and adjusting as needed. – Turn the burgers regularly over a medium-high heat for even cooking, though if they feel like they’re sticking, leave them for a few minutes and they’ll release naturally. – Bringing the burgers to room temperature before cooking and resting them properly is really important, as it stops the muscles in the meat from contracting, which would force out the moisture, leading to dry burgers. – Mincing your own steak (ask your butcher, pulse in a food processor or finely chop by hand) means that you can cook it to your liking, though make sure you cook them thoroughly if it’s for the kids, grandparents or anyone expecting. – I’ve used chuck steak as it has a good balance of fat and flavour, though you can replace some of the chuck with a leaner, more expensive cut (i.e. sirloin) if you want to cut down on the fat.