Butterflied leg of lamb with flame roasted new potatoes and grilled lettuce. This month, top chef and food writer Myles Williamson is giving us his brilliant BBQ recipes and tips. Serves: 6 portions Prepare: 35 minutes, plus marinating, barbecue setup and resting Cook: 40 minutes Ingredients 1 Whole leg lamb (about 2kg), butterflied (see how to butterfly a leg of lamb , or ask your butcher to do it for you) 50g Tin anchovy fillets in olive oil 1 Bulb garlic, roughly chopped, plus 6 bashed cloves 12 Rosemary sprigs, leaves picked, plus an extra bunch for brushing (see TIP below) 10 Bay leaves 2 Lemons, pared zest and juice 8 tbsp Olive oil 3 tbsp Red wine vinegar 1.2kg New potatoes, halved or quartered, if large 6 Little gem lettuce, halved lengthways Method 1. Pierce the butterflied leg all over with the tip of a small knife, place in a deep bowl or roasting tray and season generously. In a pestle and mortar (or small bowl), crush the anchovies and their oil with the garlic bulb, ½ the rosemary, the bay leaves and lemon zest. Mix in 4 tbsp olive oil, lemon juice and vinegar; season well. Rub the marinade thoroughly all over the lamb, then cover and chill for at least 2 hours (you can marinate up to 24 hours ahead). 2. Set up your barbecue. If using charcoal, light your barbecue 30-40 minutes ahead of time, let the coals turn ashen and glowing, then bank them to one side. Preheat a covered gas barbecue with the burners set over the highest heat for 10 minutes to get it nice and hot; if your gas barbecue doesn’t have a cooling shelf, leave one burner unlit when preheating and cooking, so that you’ve got a cool spot if everything is get a little too hot. Remove the lamb from the fridge at least 30 minutes ahead of time so that it comes to room temperature before grilling. 3. Lift the lamb from the marinade and wipe off the excess. Grill, uncovered, over a medium heat, turning often and brushing regularly with the excess marinade (see tip), until cooked to your liking, about 35-40 minutes for medium-rare. Set aside and rest under foil for at least 20 minutes. 4. Meanwhile, place the potatoes in a deep saucepan, cover with salted water and bring to the boil. Reduce the heat and simmer for about 10-15 minutes, until the potatoes are just tender. Drain, leave to steam dry for a few minutes then toss in a large bowl with the remaining rosemary, extra 6 garlic cloves and 3 tbsp olive oil. Season well, divide between 6 large sheets of foil and seal tightly; make sure there is a garlic clove in each parcel. Cook on a medium-hot part of the barbecue, turning occasionally, for about 15-20 minutes until golden and tender. 5. Coat the little gem lettuces in the final 1 tbsp olive oil, season and then grill, cut-side down, on the hottest part of the barbecue until charred and slightly softened, about 1-2 minutes. Slice the rested lamb and serve with grilled lettuce and roasted new potatoes alongside. Tips – Cook the lettuce on the hottest part of the grill so that they wilt and produce well-defined charred lines, without completely falling apart. – Cook the lamb over a medium heat, turning it every 5 minutes or so, to build up a nice caramelised crust. I like to serve mine medium-rare – about 35-40 minutes in total – but do cook it a little more, if you prefer. – Make a quick herb basting brush to apply excess marinade to the meat as it cooks. Simply tie a large bunch of woody herbs – we’ve used rosemary here – to the handle of a wooden spoon. Roasts