Cleopatra Cauliflower Salad Recipe with Samantha Murray. Sometimes salads don’t seem exciting, but it’s all about what you add to them! We asked olympian Samantha Murray to share one of her favourite recipes with us – her Cleopatra Cauliflower Salad recipe is gluten-free, vegan and is packed with goodness and flavour, perfect for summer. Ingredients Extra virgin olive oil Onion Medium sized cauliflower head Salt 2x tsp Paprika 2x tsp Sesame seeds 2x tsp Hemp seeds Coriander powder Cumin powder Fresh parsley Fresh coriander 3x cloves of garlic 1x Carrot Handful of radishes Black pepper 2x lemons 1x peach 1x avocado Large bowl of fresh rocket Salad recipe serves 2 people Method Before starting you will need to preheat your oven to 190c. Chop your cauliflower into bite sized chunks. Add finely chopped onion. Add 3-4 tbsp of oil, then add a sprinkle of salt and mix well. Place onto a baking tray and cook for 20 minutes until crispy and a golden brown colour. Add the following ingredients into a food processor or simple blender. Fresh parsley, fresh coriander, quarter cup of olive oil, chopped garlic, pepper, juice of one lemon, tsp of coriander powder, tsp of cumin power and a tsp of paprika. Blend together to make your chermoula sauce. In a separate bowl, add 2 tsp hemp seeds, 2tsp sesame seeds (more if you like), tsp cumin powder, tsp coriander power and pepper. Mix together to create your hemp-dukkah topping for later. Dress your rocket in the juice of 1 lemon, olive oil, salt and pepper. Add evenly to two separate bowls. Remove your cauliflower from the oven and place into a bowl. Add your chermoula sauce and mix together well. Chop carrot, peach, radishes and avocado and add on top of your rocket. You can now add the cauliflower on top. Dress your salad with the hemp-dukkah topping. Enjoy this nutritious salad packed with lots of different flavours! Looking for a quick and simple lunch dish to make at home? We have another olympian dish from Lizzie Simmonds with her easy omelette recipe !