Curried Fish Fingers And Sweet Potato Chips. These tasty curried fish fingers are a great way to introduce your family to more exciting foods – it looks familiar but has new flavours to explore. Recipe extracted from Get Your Kids to Eat Anything: The 5-Phase Programme by Emily Leary (Octopus Books, £16.99). Serves: 4 Prep Time: 30 minutes Cooking time: 25 minutes Ingredients For the chips 500g sweet potatoes 1 tablespoon cornflour 1 teaspoon garlic granules 1 teaspoon paprika 1 tablespoon olive oil Pinch of pepper For the fish fingers 240g skinless cod fillets 50g plain flour 1 medium free-range egg, lightly beaten 50g dried breadcrumbs Pinch of pepper ½ tablespoon garlic granules ½ tablespoon ground cumin 2 teaspoons ground turmeric ½ tablespoon ground coriander Oil spray Method Preheat the oven to 200°C, 180°C fan. Peel the sweet potatoes and cut into chips, about 1cm thick. Put them in a bowl and mix in the cornflour with your hands. Add the garlic granules, paprika and olive oil and mix again, then tip onto a non-stick baking tray in a single layer and sprinkle with pepper. Bake for 10 minutes, then turn and bake for a further 10-15 minutes until crispy on the outside and soft in the middle. Meanwhile, slice the cod into 2cm-thick fingers. Set up three bowls: the first containing the flour, the second the egg and the third the breadcrumbs. In a small dish, mix the pepper, garlic granules and spices, then stir half into the flour and half into the breadcrumbs. Dip a fish piece into the flour to lightly cover. Shake off the excess, then dip into the egg to coat, then into the breadcrumbs to cover. Repeat with every fish finger, placing on an oiled baking tray as you go. Spritz all over with oil spray. Bake for 12-14 minutes until just golden (break one open to check the fish fingers are cooked through). Serve with the chips. Top Tips: If your family are keen on spice, try upping the cumin level and adding a little chilli powder to the fish finger coating for a more pronounced kick. Once you’ve got the hang of the crumbing method, you can flavour the crumbs to your liking. Try a lemon and herb crumb for breaded chicken goujons. Looking for even more easy, kid-friendly recipes? Try a yummy fruit and oat breakfast bake or easy peanut butter and apple ‘pizzas’ Kids Recipes