Day 28: How To Switch Off In The Evening | Vitality At Home. We’re all spending a lot more time at home right now, whether that’s working, home schooling or balancing both. During these exceptional times it’s important to try and switch off in the evenings. It gives our minds the opportunity to relax and recover from the day. We asked our ambassadors and some of England Netball’s Vitality Roses what TV shows, books and films they’re watching. Read on to see what they’re enjoying. Films Team GB Paralympic athlete Ellie Simmonds recommends Rocket Man – a feel good, fun story of Elton John’s life. Rugby World Cup winner Jonny Wilkinson and former Vitality Roses coach Tracey Neville suggest revisiting some old favourites with their picks of The Matrix and Shawshank Redemption . All available on Rakuten now. TV shows Seb Coe says The Sopranos is his favourite TV show of all time. It follows the life of a US mafia boss as he tries to balance his criminal life with family responsibilities. The Writer Guild of America called it ‘the best written TV show of all time’ – which is good enough for us. Available on Rakuten and Amazon Prime. Ellie Simmonds has stayed true to her Birmingham roots with her TV pick of Peaky Blinders . Flat caps at the ready! Available on Amazon Prime. And for those looking for a bit of light relief, England Women’s Cricket captain Heather Knight has chosen Australian comedy series Please Like Me . Available on Amazon Prime. Books Dame Jessica Ennis-Hill is spending her time keeping the family entertained with Julia Donaldson books. For those looking for some slightly more grown up reads, Heather Knight is reading Margaret Atwood’s dystopian novel The Handmaid’s Tale . For any non-fiction fans out there England rugby player Maro Itoje recommends B rit(ish) by Afua Hirsh and Vitality Roses player Fran Williams suggests Everything I Know About Love by Dolly Alderton – a story of love and everlasting friendship. Finally, Ellie Simmonds is halfway through Adam Kaye’s This is Going to Hurt and loving every page. Podcasts Podcasts are a great way to zone out of the noise around you – Jodie Gibson loves the Happy Mum, Happy Baby podcast. Gabby Marshall says her favourite podcast is Don’t Tell Me the Score . Download them and let us know what you think. Try out one or a few of these recommendations and let us know what you think on our Instagram @vitality_uk , using #StayHealthyAtHome.