DIY Weight Watchers snack swaps. With summer (hopefully) on its way, the opportunities for al fresco entertaining really ramp up and it’s all too easy to pop open a big of crisps or nuts to tide over your guests until the main event… Instead, why not makeover your snacking solutions with three lighter swaps that are guaranteed to get your guests talking? 1. Veggie crisps with spicy houmus Curb that crisp addiction with these incredibly moreish crisps and use up your leftover veg at the same time. Delicious dipped in spicy houmus or on their own. SmartPoints values Per serve: 5 Per recipe: 21 15 minutes preparation 60 minutes cooking Serves 4 Ingredients: For the houmus 400g tin chickpeas 150g roasted red peppers from a jar (in water), drained 1 red chilli, deseeded and f­inely chopped ½ tsp cayenne pepper 1 tbsp tahini 1 large garlic clove, peeled and bruised with the back of a knife Juice of ½ lemon For the crisps 1 carrot 1 parsnip 1 sweet potato 1 fresh beetroot 1 tbsp vegetable oil 1 tsp smoked paprika Method: Make the crisps. Preheat the oven to 180°C, fan 160°C, gas mark 4. Trim the veg, then slice very thinly using a knife or a mandoline. Pat dry with kitchen paper then pop in a bowl with the oil and paprika. Mix it all together until evenly coated. Lay the crisps on two lined baking trays (you will need to do this in batches) and bake in the oven for 16­-18 minutes, or until crisp and golden. Some of the veg will cook quicker than others, depending on size, so keep an eye on them and remove as and when they’re done. Season well and leave to cool on a wire rack. Meanwhile, for the houmous, drain the chickpeas and reserve the liquid. Blitz the chickpeas with the remaining ingredients in a food processor – if the mixture is too thick, you can loosen it with a little of the reserved water. Season with salt and freshly ground black pepper. Serve the houmous with the crisps and crudités for dipping. 2. Paprika-chilli tacos Ditch the Doritos for these smoky hot tacos made from torn wraps. Super simple to make – they bake in 7 minutes – and you control the spice-factor. Great as party bites or to munch at your desk. SmartPoints values Per serve: 1 Per recipe: 6 5 minutes preparation 7 minutes cooking Serves 6 Ingredients: 2 Weight Watchers Wraps Calorie-controlled cooking spray Smoked paprika and chilli to taste Salt and pepper Method: Preheat the oven to 200°C, fan 180°C, gas mark 6. Tear 2 Weight Watchers Wraps into bite-size pieces, spread over a non-stick baking sheet and mist with cooking spray. Sprinkle with smoked paprika and chilli powder to taste, and season well. Using your fingers, turn the pieces of wrap to coat them in spices. Bake for 5 minutes then turn over and bake for another 2 minutes until golden and crisp. Serve straight away. 3. Spicy roasted chickpeas Give calorific nuts a nudge with these spicy little chickpea bites. Free from extra salt and sugar, season with the spices you love, then serve them hot or cold. SmartPoints values Per serve: 2 Per recipe: 7 5 minutes preparation 45 minutes cooking Serves 4 Ingredients: 400g tin chickpeas drained and rinsed 1 tsp ground cumin 1 tsp smoked paprika Pinch of cayenne pepper Calorie controlled cooking spray Freshly ground black pepper Method: Preheat the oven to 180°C, fan 160°C, gas mark 4. Pat the chickpeas dry with kitchen paper and spread them out on a small baking tray. Sprinkle over the cumin, paprika and cayenne pepper and mist with the cooking spray. Season, then toss so the chickpeas are all well coated with the spices. Roast for 45 minutes, turning halfway through cooking. Serve warm. Tip: Make double the quantity, then cool and store in an airtight container for up to a week. All these recipes are from Weight Watchers Magazine, published monthly, and Weight Watchers No Count Cookbook available from 8 May. Pick up at your local meeting or buy your copy here . Get your Weight Watchers 6 month pass for just £30 Sign up now Terms and conditions apply.