Easy exercises when you’re on the go. Over busy periods it’s understandable if you don’t have time to get to the gym, but that isn’t to say you should skip exercising completely. Virgin Active Personal Trainer Emily Cole gives you some easy ideas for fitness that you can fit in around your gym sessions and squeeze into your routine. Exercises you can do at your desk Doing exercise while at your desk ultimately depends on how much you don’t mind your colleagues seeing you breaking into a sweat! If you don’t have a problem with that, you could use your desk or chair to do some tricep dips or elevated press ups on. But if this sounds a little too embarrassing, you could give glute squeezes a go. Essentially a glute squeeze is where you tense the muscles in your backside while sitting on your chair. Not only is it a really good way to activate and strengthen up your glutes, but also no one will know that you’re doing it. Aim to do 15-20 repetitions in a row and repeat at points throughout the day. Exercises you can do on a set of stairs Stairs are a great bit of apparatus that you can use for various types of exercise. Firstly you could do a high intensity interval training (HIIT) workout session where you run up and down the stairs for 30 seconds, break for 30 seconds and then repeat nine more times, which is great for cardiovascular fitness and burning fat in just 10 minutes. If you don’t feel like running up and down the whole set, you could also do a round of HIIT step-ups on the lowest step. Exercises you can do in the street If you’re going out for a walk or a run in the park there are various ways you can maximise your session. Incorporating some intervals – jogging to that lamp post, sprinting to the next one and walking to the one after – will not only make your routine more interesting, but it will also help to improve your cardiovascular ability. You could also turn your walk into an obstacle course, so every time you go past a bench do a different set of exercises, such as elevated press ups, tricep dips, step ups and squats. Exercises you can do in your front room Move your sofa and the coffee table out of the way and you’ve got the perfect space to do some bodyweight exercises – from burpees and squat jumps, to lunges and planks . You can also do tricep dips and elevated press ups on the coffee table. Exercises you can do in your kitchen Don’t have a set of dumbbells or a kettle bell to hand at home? No problem. Head to the kitchen and get a couple of bottles of water or two bags of sugar and use these instead. Although not a like-for-like substitute for the equipment in the gym, you should still be able to do your bicep curls or kettle bell circuit with no difficulties. Join Virgin Active Get discounted gym membership at Virgin Active with Vitality*. A joining fee will apply. Find out more *Selected Vitality products only. Minimum monthly premiums and terms and conditions apply. Workouts