Escape To the Great Outdoors: Top 10 UK Hotel Stays to Keep You Active. Looking to escape to the countryside for a wellbeing breather, some scenic views and long nature walks? We’ve partnered with Mr & Mrs Smith to source ten of the best hotels in the UK, all with ways that can help you stay active on holiday. Being able to get outside and enjoy the British weather isn’t just important for physical health, but it’s also important for mental health. Taking a break away from our busy lifestyles can help when it comes to relaxing and resetting the mind. It allows us to focus on ourselves and our families whilst exploring nature, the tennis courts or even the spa. With the help of Mr & Mrs Smith , we’ve searched for some of the UK’s hotels that allow you to get walking during the day and relax during the evening. The Fish Hotel Where? Cotswolds What? This picturesque country estate hotel easily captures anyone with it’s charm and smartly styled rooms that will make you feel like you’ve truly escaped the city life. Located in the idyllic Cotswolds you can stay amongst nature in shepherds huts and treehouses, which really immerse you in country living. The setting is ideal for families and is also pet-friendly, so those woodland walks with the pups are more than possible. From just £170 per night including a glass of champagne at the bar, this really is nature lover’s paradise. Another Place Where? Lake District What? Do you love the outdoors but are also looking for something a little more contemporary? Another Place has everything you could wish for. With cosy yet modern rooms that have a touch of eccentric flare it’s no wonder this boutique hotel is a favourite in the Lake District. During the day you can get active by running trails, kayaking, wild swimming or hiking the surrounding hills. By night you can relax by the pool or private lake with your partner or family, and take in the beautiful sights. Prices start from £203 per night and you can choose a bottle from the Land&Water Bath range. The Talbot Where? Malton/Yorkshire What? If you’re looking for somewhere that you can not only get out into the countryside for a breath of fresh air, but also to indulge in some delicious food then The Talbot is the place for you. Situated in the market town of Malton, which is known for being one of the best foodie towns in the UK. This cosy inn is ideal for visiting during the colder winter months, with snuggly fireplaces located throughout the hotel to help you feel comforted after braving the outdoors. Get a sense of community in this snug hotel designed for couples to cosy up and relax. Prices start from £150 per night and include a £10 voucher to use at the Talbot Yard Food Court. The Lygon Arms Where? Cotswolds What? Feel like a King or Queen when you stay at the historic The Lygon Arms, which has even hosted King Charles I and Elizabeth Taylor. Located in the stunning Cotswolds and steeped in riveting history, the Bucolic boutique hotel welcomes couples, families and even dogs (because they should feel like royalty too). With an indoor pool that you can swim some lengths in, and next to the Broadway Village which you can take long leisurely strolls through. Both perfect for staying active on holiday but feeling relaxing too. Prices start from £182 a night and you’ll receive a half-bottle of champagne and a box of chocolates in your room. St Ives Harbour Hotel & Spa Where? Cornwall What? For a picturesque dose of summer sun in the UK, you’ll be hard pressed to find better than St Ives Harbour Hotel & Spa. Located in the stunning artist-retreat town of Porthminster Beach, you’ll have access to sun and sand, but also a top-drawer spa and pool for you to choose from. Prices start from £217 a night and you’ll receive a Harbour Hotel-branded candle to make sure you go straight into full-on relaxation mode in one of Cornwall’s most beautiful areas. Kids go half-price, too, meaning the whole family can get pampered. Cliveden Where? Berkshire What? If you want to experience the life of a rich aristocrat, look no further than the stunning Cliveden, the former Berkshire home of the so-called ‘Cliveden set’, some of the most influential people in 20th century Britain. Nestled snugly in 376 acres of National Trust parkland, you’ll be living the high life in the Riverside stay Spring Cottage, which sits in a private English garden in the luxury hotel’s wooded grounds. Prices for the Cliveden start from £462 a night, and you’ll receive a half-bottle of champagne and a box of chocolates in your room to ensure you’re living the luxury life as soon as you arrive. The Pig near Bath Where? Somerset What? For a truly authentic country experience, The Pig near Bath hotel will deliver everything you could want. The delicious, hyper-local food is largely sourced from suppliers within a 25-mile radius, with most of it grown in the hotel’s own gardens, farm and orchard, ensuring you’ll be eating the freshest meals possible. The hotel is a 20-minute drive away from beautiful Bath, meaning you can enjoy a day trip to the historic town before heading back to enjoy The Pig near Bath’s acres of deer park. Prices start from £207 a night and you’ll be greeted with a bottle of Pig Hut wine in your room to kick off your stay in style. Homewood Where? Bath What? For the perfect mix of countryside and city break, Homewood’s location just outside of Bath is hard to beat. The Prior Park Landscape Garden provides incredible views of the Palladian Bridge, and with a secret landscaped garden and summerhouse glade there are plenty of incredible sights to take in. As if that wasn’t relaxing enough, there is also a holistic spa and heated outdoor pool to ensure you are as relaxed as possible in its beautiful setting. Prices start from £236 a night, and you’ll get a half-bottle of champagne and a selection of luxury chocolates waiting in your room, too. Hampton Manor Where? Hampton-in-Arden What? Hampton Manor sits on the grounds of a house once owned by former Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel, so it will come as no surprise to hear that the estate is a huge 45 acres, with plenty of amazing sights to see and walks to go on. Whether it’s beneath the stately pine trees or in the walled garden, you’ll be sure to find a spot to unwind. There’s also an acclaimed restaurant on-site to tempt you back in from the hotel’s expansive grounds. Prices start from £588 a night, including a personalised cocktail each at the Maker’s table, followed by cream tea in the parlour. The Swan Southwold Where? Suffolk What? Just steps away from Southwold beach, The Swan, Southwold is a lively cocktail of Georgian architecture, modern maritime style and incredible, award-winning booze. When you’re not enjoying drinks from the Adnams brewery and distillery, which the hotel is anchored to, you can surf it up with paddle boarding and surfing lessons in the modest waves mere minutes away on the beach, which the hotel can arrange for you. Prices start from £200 a night, and you’ll receive a seasonal Adnams gift bag; GoldSmiths also get locally made chocolates. If you are planning to take a trip, make sure you read our tips to ensure you stay healthy on holiday. As a Vitality member, you could get discounts with our travel partners including Mr & Mrs Smith. Available with eligible health insurance , life insurance and investments plans. Log in to Member Zone for the details.