Escape The Winter Nights: Top 10 Cosy UK Hotel Getaways. As winter draws in and the nights get longer, nothing beats a cosy night in with a log fire and some amazing hot food to warm you up on a winter night. We’ve partnered with Mr & Mrs Smith to source ten of the best hotels in the UK to give you a cosy getaway from the wintry cold. As it does all start to get a bit colder in the UK, it is important to ensure we are still enjoying our evenings, even if there isn’t as much light outside to take part in activities in. Taking a break away from the dark and the cold can do wonders for our wellbeing. With the help of Mr & Mrs Smith , we’ve searched for some of the UK’s hotels that allow you to keep cosy and warm, even when it’s the opposite outside. The Dunstane Houses Where? Edinburgh What? If you want to experience a life of Victorian prosperity, look no further than the Dunstane Houses. Located ten minutes from Edinburgh city centre in West Coates, the hotel has grand proportions, a smoky sandstone facade and decorative crow-stepped gables, with cosy rooms featuring soft wool throws, Afghan rugs and deep soaking tubs. The average daily rate is £214 and you’ll get a bottle of wine and 1pm checkout to go along with it. Artist Residence Brighton Hotel room Where? Brighton What? If you’re into your art, look no further than the Artist Residence Brighton. With its 11 ‘artists’ rooms, all individually decorated by local and international artists, and 13 ‘house’ rooms with up-cycled furniture and limited-edition prints, there’s so much to enjoy in your room before you even get outside to the nearby sea and West Pier. The average daily rate is £176 and you’ll get a bottle of Bramley body wash, too. Dormy House Where? Cotswolds What? Nestled deep in the Cotswolds’ countryside, boutique hotel Dormy House is a 17th century farmhouse given a 21st century twist by Le Manoir aux Quat-Saisons makeover team, Todhunter Earle. You’re just a scenic wander away from Broadway village and a half-hour’s drive away from Stratford-upon Avon. The average daily rate is £353, and you’ll get a scented candle designed exclusively for Dormy House in your room, too. Grantley Hall Where? Ripon What? If you’re into your swimming, Grantley Hall will have a real treat for you – the hotel featured a sleek spa which will take you back to Roman times, with its marble-clad atrium, columns and cloistered ceiling. The 17th century style stay will give you the comfort of an amazing spa experience in the Yorkshire Dales, with 30 acres of parkland to explore. The average daily rate is £498 and you’ll get a bottle of champagne and a box of chocolates upon your arrival. Forest Side Where? Lake District What? Even the most unwavering urbanite will be convinced by the food-focused Forest Side hotel in the Lake District. Designer James Mackie perfected the contemporary country look throughout the hotel, with glorious grounds and an excellent restaurant to enjoy throughout your stay. The average daily rate is £305, and you’ll get a gift set from Bath House of Sedburgh, too. Lord Poulett Arms Where? Somerset What? Welcoming travellers all the way since 1680, the Lord Poulett Arms in the scenic Somerset village of Hinton Saint George is a dreamy British drinking den. With some incredible Great British pub grub from around the world, you’ll find something delicious to suit every possible taste in its fantastic restaurant. With furniture sourced from antique markets all over the world and cosy mood lighting, you’ll never want to leave. The average daily rate is £121 and you’ll get two 50ml bottles of Bramley products, too. Coworth Park Where? Berkshire What? Coworth Park boasts a sprawling estate, and its crowning glory is the Dower House, a three-bedroom, grade II-listed Georgian residence featuring its own kitchen, living rooms and garden. You can stroll along the riverfront in your own garden and enjoy a kitchen worthy of a chef, and when you want to see the rest of the hotel, you can enjoy the Coworth Park spa to make your stay even cosier. The average daily rate is £456 and you’ll get a bottle of wine chosen by the Sommelier with your stay. Lucknam Park Hotel & Spa Where? Wiltshire What? For a cosy stay to stave off the winter blues, you’d be hard-pressed to find a hotel offering more to do than Lucknam Park. With an award-winning spa, Michelin-starred restaurant, 500 acres of parkland and an equestrian centre stabling 35 steeds, along with an indoor heated pool, an indoor and outdoor hydrotherapy pool and an outdoor saltwater plunge pool, you’ll be stunned by the range of activities on offer. And you’re only 15 minutes away from Bath by car – not that you’ll ever want to leave the hotel! The average daily rate is £423 and you’ll get traditional afternoon tea for two included. The Swan Where? Oxfordshire What? Just south of Chipping Norton, The Swan boasts an open-all-day mod-British restaurant with some fantastic food – and Aperol spritz on tap! When you’re not filling your stomach you can fill your days with some afternoon rambles in the countryside, or through the lavender-framed courtyard. The average daily rate is £126 and you’ll get a bottle of 100 Acres Apothecary natural hand wash in a pretty gift bag, too. The Pig on the Beach Where? Dorset What? For a cosy, contemporary country-house style stay, look no further than The Pig On The Beach. With beautiful Studland views and charming vintage decor, along with a kitchen-garden menu, the Pig On The Beach is the perfect country-house escape for ramblers and foodies. The average daily rate is £220 and you’ll get a bottle of Pig Hut wine in your room when you arrive. If you are planning to take a trip, make sure you read our tips to ensure you stay healthy on holiday. You should also check the government’s general coronavirus guidance , the government’s travel guidance, and the government’s guidance for passengers before your trip for the latest rules and regulations. As a Vitality member, you could get discounts with our travel partners including Mr & Mrs Smith. Available with eligible health insurance , life insurance and investments plans. Log in to Member Zone for the details.