Expedia’s Top Tips and Tricks to Save Travellers Time and Money in 2022. Published: 14 April 2022. Written by: Vitality in collaboration with Expedia Are you thinking of booking a holiday but worried about the costs? Expedia and Airlines Reporting Corporation (ARC) have revealed their handy travel hacks on how to book and how you can save money on your next holiday. Wanderlust is on the up again, with travellers ready to explore the world and experience life-changing holidays once again. As we approach Easter, the platinum jubilee weekend and summer, it feels about time to start booking those restorative holidays once more, but with the cost of living crisis becoming more apparent, concerns over costs are arising. Almost 20% of Brits are seeking saving tips in order to save money on their next trip*, so Expedia and Airlines Reporting Corporation (ARC) are sharing their ultimate travel hacks guide to help travellers navigate booking a vacation in 2022. Airfare booking hacks for 2022 Based on data from ARC, average ticket prices (ATPs), airfares hit their lowest levels in December 2020 and January 2021, though as confidence in travel grew, and with a steady increase in demand, particularly over the summer, ticket prices have started to normalise to pre-pandemic levels. Meanwhile, ATPs for international flights have steadily increased over the year, however prices are still on average 15% lower compared to 2019. Knowing what day to book, how far in advance, and what day to travel is key to saving on costs. Optimal Booking Window For domestic flights, Brits have started to book their trips further out in advance. Share of flights booked 9 and more weeks in advance increased from an average of 20% in 2019 to an average of 25% in 2021. For international flights, the share of flights booked 9 and more weeks in advance increased from an average of 40% in 2019 to an average of 45% in 2020 and 50% in 2021. Ideal day of the week to book Book your domestic flight on a Sunday rather than a Friday and you could save around 20% If you’re looking at international flights, the same rules apply but the saving is a little less at 15% So if you’re doing some holiday planning, put some time in your diary on a Sunday to sit down and book your flights. Ideal day of the week to travel Travellers typically think that Tuesday is the best day of the week to fly domestically, but the ideal day is actually Friday with savings of around 20% Again, flying internationally on a Friday will help to save you money with about a 10% savings Best month to travel Being flexible when it comes to flying is a great way to save on your flights, so when holiday booking it can be worth looking at flights first before deciding on the month. If you’re flying in the UK then the best month to go away is in November where you can save up to 45% on costs And if you’re escaping to somewhere a little more exotic, the ideal month to travel in is September with a saving of up to 40% Splurge and go premium Traveling in luxury is now cheaper ever, with a steady decline in costs over the last few years with premium tickets costing 380% more in 2019, compared to costing 250% more in 2021. That means it’s worth treating yourself to a premium ticket and enjoying the benefits for less. Accommodation savings tips for 2022 It’s often the accommodation that can hike up costs when booking a holiday, but there are some ways to save and they don’t all involve having to stay somewhere that doesn’t suit your needs! Stays in the UK are still quite high but with some of the below tricks you can get a good deal and stay in a place that is perfect for you. Ideal day of the week to book Put an hour in your Friday diary because booking your domestic accommodation on this day can help travelers to save 5%. Avoid booking your holiday when you book your flights on a Sunday because you’re likely to see some of the most expensive average daily rates on hotels If you’re booking an international holiday then book this on Wednesday and you could save up to 5% Ideal day of the week to stay What day are you going to check-in to your accommodation? Most of us prefer to start our holidays on a weekend but choosing to start your domestic or international holiday on a Monday could see travelers saving up to 10%. Down-star accommodation to save When researching for hotels and apartments to stay in, we all know just how important those star ratings are. You don’t need to look for a one star accommodation to save on costs, just lowering your choice by a single rating can see significant savings. Opt from a 5-star to a 4-star to see a 50% saving or opt from a 4-star to a 3-star and you could see 30% savings. Car Rental Road trips and exploring destinations closer to home or veering off the beaten track in new places is a trend we’ve seen grow since the beginning of the pandemic. As travellers continue to plan road trips, Expedia’s data indicates the best day to book a car rental is on a Monday for domestic trips. For travellers exploring international getaways, the cheapest day to book a car hire is on a Saturday. Meanwhile, starting the car rental on a Tuesday tends to be the cheapest day for domestic bookings, while Sunday is the best day for international trips. Bundle and save When booking your holiday it’s worth considering booking your flights and accommodation together because you can see some savings from bundling up. If you’re booking through Expedia you can save up to 10% with their bundle offers which means you have more for another exciting trip or to put towards monthly expenses. As a Vitality member, you could get discounts off hotels from Expedia . Available with qualifying health insurance , life insurance and investment plans. Log in to the Member Zone for the details.