Family-Friendly Fitness Classes You Need To Try. Exercising as a family helps you all stay happy, healthy and active. Here are some great family fitness ideas to get you moving – together. Exercise is important for your family. It boasts a whole host of benefits such as better general health, a stronger body and higher levels of self-esteem. Plus, regular family activities and introducing fitness at an early age can help your kids form healthy habits for life. The nature of today’s world means it’s sometimes difficult for families to spend time together. But, research by David Lloyd Clubs shows there’s a growing trend of families cleverly managing quality time while reaping health benefits by exercising together. Over a third (39%) of families claim they regularly work out together, with more now finding fun ways to be active as a unit over more traditional activities. It’s a great opportunity to let the kids take the lead and feel empowered and there are so many easy ways to get started. From trampolining, skipping or hula-hooping in the garden or a run around with the dog in your local park – the possibilities are endless. Then, when you’re ready to up the ante, you’ll find lots of programmes and classes the UK aimed at making exercise fun for kids. The more they enjoy it, the more likely they are to stick with it. Boost motivation levels even more by tracking both yours and your children’s activity . PRAMA at David Lloyd Clubs PRAMA is a fun, unique workout for the whole family, complete with interactive floor and walls, flashing lights and music. Forget rowers, treadmills and bikes, PRAMA reacts directly to feet hitting the floor, hands pressing the wall and equipment slamming the ground. As you move between the different stations, the workout changes. From the kids doing hopscotch to you all working out together to run and touch targets, it’s an innovative way to keep fit. Club V at Virgin Active Club V allows kids to choose from sports, dance, pool time, racquet games and family events, with sessions focusing on learning new skills, making friends and boosting confidence. Superstars gym floor at Nuffield Health At more than 100 fitness and wellbeing gyms, Superstars (children aged 8-16 years old) have access to the gym floor and their own timetable of classes as part of their membership. Children aged 8-11 can attend staff-led fitness sessions on the gym floor or studio, while 12-13 year-olds can attend the gym with a parent or guardian, so once they’ve had an induction, you can all work on your fitness together. Trampolining at 1Life Centres Take your back-garden trampolining skills to the next level with 1Life’s popular trampolining sessions . The hour long classes are aimed at three-year-olds through to adults, and focus on learning the basic moves so even if you’ve never done it before, you can take part. Once you’re comfortable, you’ll move on through to more challenging moves (think somersault) – all under the guidance of qualified coaches. Looking for something a bit different? 1Life centres host hundreds of other activities, suitable for your whole family – so there’s something for everyone. Family Fun swimming at Everybody Sport Offered at various locations in the North West of England, these Family Fun sessions are ideal for those wanting to venture into the pool for a fitness fix. Swimming sessions are available for all children aged 17 and under and their families. You can pay as you go, but sessions are also included in club memberships. Want to stay healthy and active with your family and have fun while you’re at it? Find out how eligible Vitality members can get discounts with David Lloyd , Virgin Active and Nuffield Health . Fitness