Fishdogs with quick pickled onion and yoghurt tartare sauce. This month, top chef and food writer Myles Williamson is giving us his brilliant BBQ recipes and tips. Serves: 4 portions Prepare: 20 minutes, plus barbecue setup and soaking time Cook: 15 minutes Ingredients 4 Monkfish tails (or other firm white fish filets), sliced into long portions about 15cm long and about 3-4cm thick 4 Large submarine hot dogs buns 1 Medium red onion, finely sliced 2 Limes, juice and zest (2 tbsp red wine vinegar) 1 tbsp Maple syrup 1 tbsp Olive oil For the tartare sauce 200g Greek strained natural yogurt 4 Medium gherkins or cornichons, finely chopped, plus 2 tbsp pickling liquor 3 tbsp Small capers, drained, rinsed and roughly chopped Small bunch flat leaf parsley, stalks finely chopped, leaves roughly chopped 4 Tarragon sprigs, leaves pickled and roughly chopped (optional) Method 1. Set up your barbecue. If using charcoal, light your barbecue 30-40 minutes ahead of time, let the coals turn ashen and glowing, then bank them to one side. Preheat a covered gas barbecue with the burners set over the highest heat for 10 minutes to get it nice and hot; if your gas barbecue doesn’t have a cooling shelf, leave one burner unlit when preheating and cooking, so that you’ve got a cool spot if everything is get a little too hot. Remove the fish from the fridge at least 15 minutes ahead of time so that it comes to room temperature before grilling. 2. Cover the sliced red onions in just boiled water for 5 minutes, then drain and mix in a small bowl with the lime zest and juice (or vinegar), maple syrup and a generous pinch of salt; cover and chill until needed. 3. In a separate bowl, mix together all the ingredients for the tartar sauce, reserving a small handful of parsley leaves, to serve. Season generously and then cover and chill alongside the onions. 4. Pat the fish portions dry on kitchen paper, season with salt and coat with the olive oil. Grill on the hottest part of the grill, carefully turning every 3-4 minutes, until charred and just cooked through, about 12 minutes in total; set aside and keep warm, covered with foil. Slice the hot dog rolls open and toast, cut-side down, on the hottest part of the grill for a few minutes. Spread the toasted rolls with the tartar sauce, top with the grilled fish, followed by a handful of the pink pickled onions. Serve scattered with the reserved parsley leaves. Tips – Monkfish tails work particularly well here due to their natural long shape and firm yet flaky texture, though you can substitute it for other robust white fish, like cod or haddock; look out for loin piece to make the preparation easier. – Keep and freeze any offcuts of leftover fish, to use in other dishes, like fish soup or pie.