Five Day Workout: Full Body Strength Series with Peloton. Want to change up your workout routine? We’ve teamed up with Peloton to give you an exciting week of core, upper body and lower body circuits that will get you feeling pumped and strong. Workout with the full body strength series below! Peloton is a global interactive fitness platform that brings the energy and benefits of studio-style workouts to the convenience and comfort of home. With thousands of classes across a variety of disciplines, taught by a roster of elite instructors, Peloton delivers real-time motivation and curated playlists from the world’s best artists. In the UK, the brand’s immersive content is accessible through the Peloton Bike and the Peloton App, which provide a full slate of fitness offerings, wherever you are. For this series, Peloton Instructor Hannah Frankson has created five workouts to improve your full body strength and help make getting active fun. Get moving by following the below links to tune into our IGTV. We recommend a work to rest ratio at 30s on 30s off for Beginners, 40s on 20s off for our Intermediate levels and 45s on 15s off for our Advanced levels. Be sure to work out in a safe and clear space, stay hydrated and modify where needed. Day 1 – Arms and Shoulders What you’ll need: Light dumbbells (2-6kg) 4 exercises, repeat circuit 3-4 times – Lateral Raises – Bicep Curls – Tricep Kickback – Wide Shoulder Press Day 2 – Back and Chest What you’ll need: Light dumbbells (2-5kg) 4 exercises, repeat circuit 3-4 times – Press Up – Quadrant Single Arm Row – Reciprocal Chest Press – Quadrant Single Arm Fly Day 3 – Core 4 exercises, repeat circuit 3-4 times – Deadbug – Hollow Hold – Side Plank – Plank with Arm Reach Day 4 – Lower Body Strength 4 exercises, repeat circuit 3-4 times – Glute Bridge – Glute Bridge March – Single Leg Deadlift – Reverse Lunge Day 5 – Lower Body Power Use your bodyweight or a single medium dumbbell (5-9kg) 4 exercises, repeat circuit 3-4 times – Squat – Split Squat – Get Up Get Down – Lateral Lunge Feeling like you’re doing the same exercise routine? Fear not, we have some advice on how to mix-up your workout routine when you feel like you’re a stuck in a rut. As a Vitality member, you could get partner benefits and rewards with a range of big brands. Available with eligible health insurance , life insurance and investments plans. Log in to Member Zone for the details.