Get Some Summer R&R: The 8 Best UK Hotels For A Wellness-Focused Getaway. Published: 29 March 2021. Written in collaboration with Mr & Mrs Smith. After the year we’ve all had, and with restrictions on travel beginning to loosen, we’re all going to want some rest, recuperation, and wellness on our getaways. International travel might be harder to come by due to countries’ different restrictions, but you don’t have to go far to find some truly dreamy getaways for a holiday of rest this summer. With the help of Mr & Mrs Smith , we’ve found some of the best UK properties that guarantee to care for your wellbeing this summer. Beaverbrook Where? Surrey What? Set in the Surrey Hills, this historic hotel offers you a flower-filled Couch House Spa with six treatment suites. Take your pick of tailored massages, exfoliating body treatments and honey-infused facials – all use home-branded Coach House oils made from plants, flowers and fruits from the estate. There’s also a nail lounge and gym, with a rotating mix of fitness, yoga and Pilates sessions too, so you’ll be sure to find a wellness activity to suit your needs. The average daily rate is £514 and you’ll get a bottle of Beaverbrook Blanc de Blancs sparkling wine to go along with it. Chewton Glen Where? Hampshire What? Poised halfway between a rural retreat and a seaside sanctuary, Chewton Glen is the only privately owned five-star in the UK. Its on-site, award-winning spa is just minutes from the seaside, with a 17m swimming pool, a hydrotherapy spa pool, cold drench showers, aromatherapy saunas and steam rooms to help you unwind. The hotel is just a 15-minute walk from the sea, too. The average daily rate is £522 and you’ll also get a half-bottle of champagne and a box of chocolates included. Another Place Where? Lake District What? Nestled in the idyllic Lake District, Another Place is a boutique hotel bringing cosy-yet-contemporary style to the national park. With a lake-facing spa, you can relax in the 20m infinity pool providing views of Ullswater and the fells beyond. There’s even a hot tub outside for some star-gazing opportunities, with wild swimming available for those who want to fully embrace the outdoors! The average daily rate is £277 and you’ll get a bottle from the essential-oil-packed Land&water bath and body range; Goldsmiths receive two bottles. Grantley Hall Where? Ripon What? This dashing 17th century hotel brings Gstaad glamour to the Yorkshire Dales, with a sleep spa and a futuristic fitness centre for all of your wellness needs. With ritzy restaurants and 30 acres of parkland to explore, you’ll be able to unwind in style. The average daily rate is £509 and you’ll get a welcome bottle of champagne and a box of chocolates upon your arrival, too. Cliveden Where? Berkshire What? This regal residence is one of England’s most distinguished historic homes, and it’s set snugly in 376 acres of National Trust parkland. You’ll be able to enjoy a pavilion spa, a state-of-the-art Technogym gym, as well as tennis and squash courts, a boathouse, a library, a helipad and more – there’s so much on offer in terms of wellness here for you to do to relax and unwind. The average daily rate is £513, and you’ll get a half bottle of champagne and a box of chocolates, too. Heckfield Place Where? Hampshire What? This eco-friendly estate is a handsome and historic destination set in the Hampshire countryside. With a superstar chef and in-house Little Bothy Spa, this hotel has an eco focus, with an emphasis on bespoke massages and facials that use ethically-sourced, all-natural products from the hotel’s own Wildsmith Skin range. The average daily rate is £494, and you’ll get a bottle of sommelier-chosen English wine in your room upon your arrival. Lime Wood Where? Hampshire What? This spa hotel is a stately manor with an air of perception about its primly landscaped estate. Its soul-soothing Herb House spa is spread across three floors, with assorted treatment rooms (eight single, two double and one for manis and pedis), a mud house, sauna, steam house, indoor pool with serene forest views, steamingly-hot outdoor pool, sun deck with a herb garden. Due to Covid-19, the spa will be closed until further government guidance. The average daily rate is £514 and you’ll get a bottle of champagne to welcome you. You should also check the government’s general coronavirus guidance, the government’s travel guidance, and the government’s guidance for passengers before your trip for the latest rules and regulations. For more ways to reflect on wellness going into spring, check out our article featuring the 6 small positives we can all take from a year in lockdown. As a Vitality member, you could get discounts with our travel partners including Mr & Mrs Smith. Available with eligible health insurance, life insurance and investments plans. Log in to Member Zone for the details.