Get healthy with Joe Wicks. Joe Wicks, AKA The Body Coach, is best known for his Lean In 15 HIIT training sessions and healthy meals made in 15 minutes. Here, he shares his top tips for living a healthier life What is wellness? It’s about being happy with your life. For me that means keeping active, drinking loads of water and eating foods that make me feel great. If your body is running well, you’ll have the energy to take on anything. What type of exercise do you prefer? I’m all about HIIT (high intensity interval training) sessions, four to five times a week. They use short bursts of energy, they don’t take too long and you can do them anywhere. I’ve filmed YouTube HIIT videos on beaches, in hotel rooms, in my living room – there are no excuses not to train (check out our 7-minute HIIT core workout ). Do you like to work out solo or with someone else? One of my favourite things to do is to work out with my leanies [Joe’s followers]. When I was in Australia recently, I posted on Snapchat that I wanted to do a group HIIT session and 200 people turned up on Bondi Beach to work out with me. That was insane and I loved it. Lunch out or al desko? What do you prefer? I love that phrase, al desko – I’m going to steal that. I’m always on the go nowadays so it has to be lunch out. If I’ve done a HIIT session that morning, I might have a burger. A rest day lunch would be something like a tuna steak with salad . Which five items are always in your fridge? Hmm… probably chicken or turkey, avocados, spinach, almond milk – and some bacon. What’s your guilty pleasure? Burgers! I could eat burgers until the cows come home. If I could have a burger every day and it didn’t do anything to my body I would, but if it’s not a treat it doesn’t taste as good. What do you do if you ever feel anxious? My answer to anxiety is to do a HIIT session. For me, it’s one of the best ways to chill out. High intensity exercise is not just about staying lean – it also re-energises me and keeps me focused. I like to relax by listening to music, too. I’m always blasting out some pop music in the office but there’s nothing better than listening to a little bit of Magic FM before bed. What’s in your shopping trolley? Chicken, Lucy Bee Extra Virgin Organic Raw Coconut Oil, eggs and sweet potatoes. What was your New Year’s resolution? The same as every year – keep spreading the word about Lean In 15 and keep working hard to get rid of diets and get the world lean. Joe’s DVD, Joe Wicks: Lean In 15 , is out now (£14.99) Feeling inspired? Read our tips for transforming your eating habits to help you eat better this year.