Grilled halloumi burger with homemade ketchup. Ideal for the BBQ season and Meat Free Mondays , veggie chef twins David and Stephen Flynn have created this halloumi burger with delicious homemade ketchup and mayo. It might just make you forget about meat all together… Serves 2-4 Ingredients For the burger 1 courgette 1 aubergine 1 red pepper 200g halloumi cheese 5 tbsp olive oil 1 tsp salt 4 burger buns or wholemeal pittas 50g rocket or similar greens For The Happy Pear ketchup (makes approx 400ml) 200g good-quality tomato purée 90g maple syrup/agave syrup 6 tbsp white wine vinegar/apple cider vinegar 5 tbsp water 1 tsp sea salt 1 red chilli, optional For The Happy Pear mayo (makes approx 650ml) 2 cloves of garlic 300ml soya milk 3 tbsp lemon juice ¾ tsp salt ¼ tsp freshly ground black pepper 1½ tbsp Dijon mustard 300ml olive oil Method To make the burger Cut the courgette in half and then into thin strips, lengthwise. Slice the aubergines lengthwise into thin strips. Chop the pepper vertically into 4 large sections, discarding the core with the seeds. Chop the halloumi into 4 thin rectangular slices. Put the cut veg into a large bowl with 4 tbsp of the oil and 1 tsp of salt. Mix well until they’re all evenly coated. Grill the prepared veg on a hot barbecue, turning regularly – you want them nicely charred but also soft and tender. Remove the veg and set aside. Put the halloumi on the barbecue for about 5 minutes until it has nice grill marks on each side. Toast the buns on the barbecue, then layer them up with some homemade ketchup on the bottom bun, homemade mayo on the top bun, grilled courgettes, aubergine, peppers and halloumi and some rocket in-between. To make the ketchup Mix all the ingredients in a bowl until smooth and well-blended. If you want to spice it up, add the red chilli, chopped, seeds and all. To make the mayo Preheat the oven to 180°C/gas mark 4. Put the garlic cloves (in their skins) on a baking tray and roast for 10 minutes, until soft. Squeeze the garlic cloves out of their skins into a blender, and add all the other ingredients except the olive oil. Blend for 1 minute then, keeping the blender running, slowly add the oil until the mix emulsifies. Recipe extracted from The World Of The Happy Pear (Penguin, £21.99).