Grilled Watermelon And Halloumi Salad With Mint Dressing. Top chef and food writer Myles Williamson gives us a brilliant BBQ recipe for Grilled Watermelon and Halloumi Salad. Serves: 4 portions (or 6 as a side) Prepare: 15 minutes, plus barbecue set up time Cook: 10 minutes Ingredients 1 small watermelon, peeled, deseeded and sliced into 2cm thick wedges 250g pack of halloumi, cut into 0.5cm thick slices For the mint dressing Bunch of mint leaves Handful of spinach leaves 1 small garlic clove, finely crushed 1 lemon, zested with 2 tbsp of juice 2 tbsp of extra virgin olive oil, plus extra to serve Method 1. Set up your BBQ If using charcoal, light your barbecue 30-40 minutes ahead of time, let the coals turn ashen and glowing, then bank them to one side. Or preheat a covered gas barbecue with the burners set over the highest heat for 10 minutes to get it nice and hot. 2. Meanwhile, make the mint dressing Reserve a small handful of the mint leaves, and then blend the rest with all the other ingredients in the small bowl of a food processor until smooth. With the motor running, gradually add 3-6 tbsp of cold water until you’ve reached your desired consistency; it should be thin and pour-able but not watery, like single cream. 3. Grill the watermelon and halloumi Place the watermelon slices on the hottest part of the grill, cooking for about 2-3 minutes on each side until charred and just starting to soften; transfer to serving plates (or a large platter). Next, cook the halloumi on the hottest part of the grill for 1-2 minutes on each side until marked with char-lines, before interspersing with the grilled watermelon. Spoon over the bright green dressing, drizzle with a little more oil and scatter over the reserved mint leaves before serving. Tip: There’s no need to add oil to the watermelon or halloumi, especially if you’re cooking them on the hottest part of the grill. If they feel like they’re sticking, simple leave for a few more minutes and they’ll naturally release themselves. Dinner Lunch