Gym Etiquette for Newbies. Given the popularity of fitness-related New Year’s resolutions, it’s not surprising that January is one of the busiest periods at the gym. For the first few weeks after the holiday season, fitness studios are inundated with new members eager to follow through on their resolutions and shed the results of festive overindulgence. While it’s commendable that more people are taking steps to improve their health, the seasonal influx sometimes leads to friction with existing members. This is usually the result of gym newbies being unaware of (and thus failing to follow) the principles of gym etiquette. While many gyms post basic rules to ensure harmony in the workout space, there are often finer points that may escape a first-time visitor. If you’re a gym newbie eager to take your place in the community without stepping on any toes, here are some gym etiquette tips to make you look like a seasoned gym-goer. Wipe down equipment after use This is perhaps the number one rule of gym etiquette, and goes a long way toward making the gym a happier and healthier place for everyone. After you finish using a machine, wipe off your sweat using a clean towel and antibacterial spray if provided. Not only does this save the next user from the unpleasant experience of having to touch a machine covered in cold, stale sweat, but it also improves hygiene in the gym and helps prevents the spread of germs. Make an effort to learn how to use equipment Using gym equipment incorrectly not only makes your workout less effective, but can also result in injury to yourself or those around you. If you’re not sure how to use a machine, there’s nothing wrong with asking a staff member for a quick intro – they’ll be happy to help. Better yet, book an introductory session with a personal trainer – not only will they explain how all the machines work, but they can also set out a workout routine tailored to your needs. Keep your times reasonable This rule is particularly important when the gym is busy – there’s nothing worse than having to wait ages for your turn on a machine when you’re trying to keep up your pace. 30 minutes is a reasonable time to use a cardio machine – only carry on for longer if there are a number of the same machines free. During peak periods, keep your use to 20 minutes per machine so that everyone gets a turn. A similar rule applies to weight machines and other equipment. If you’re resting between sets, don’t sit on the machine when someone else could be using it – in some cases it might be feasible for another member to “work in” with you, i.e., alternate sets and resting periods so neither of you has to wait too long for a piece of equipment. Respect others’ space Gyms tend to be crowded enough at peak periods without feeling that someone is breathing down your neck. Whether you’re stretching on a mat, doing curls in the weight area or joining a group class, make sure to leave a suitable space between yourself and other members. Not only do people feel more comfortable when you respect their personal space, but it also cuts down the potential for accidents caused by a misplaced elbow or dropped weight. On a similar note, don’t stand over someone waiting for them to finish with a piece of equipment – it can easily ruin their concentration and affect the quality of their workout. Instead, ask politely how long or how many reps they have to go – or better yet, ask them to let you know when they’re finished and then find something else to occupy your waiting time. Put equipment away when you’ve finished When you’ve finished using free weights or any other equipment, be sure to return them to their designated storage space so the next user can easily find them. It’s particularly important not to leave weights and other kit strewn about on the floor, as aside from cluttering up the space, they represent a tripping hazard. If you’re using a barbell with weight plates, unload the weights when you’re finished and return them to their rack. Not everyone will be pressing the same amount of weight as you, and this saves quite a lot of hassle for the next user. Use the gym for working out, not socialising There’s nothing wrong with making friends at the gym, but remember that most gym-goers are there to focus on their workout. Many exercises require intense concentration, and having to listen to someone else discussing their social life in close proximity can be highly distracting. Try to avoid making calls on your mobile phone, and if you do wish to chat in person, step off to the side and keep your voice at a reasonable level. Definitely don’t sit or stand on a machine that someone else could otherwise be using, and try not to block traffic by congregating in the aisles in groups. Look after equipment It’s important to show respect for gym property – damaged and unusable equipment inconveniences everyone. Don’t drop weights with undue force (or worse yet, fling them across the floor), and be sure to ease machines back into their resting position rather than allowing them to clang into place. If you come across something that’s out of order, don’t just ignore it – let a staff member know so that it can be repaired. This saves other people experiencing the same inconvenience, and also can prevent potential injury from using malfunctioning equipment. Show consideration with hygiene and attire It’s true that everyone gets a bit hot and sweaty at the gym, but you can help avoid the unpleasant consequences of this by following basic hygiene measures. Wear clean workout clothes each time, use deodorant and air out your trainers regularly to prevent strong odours. When using the showers and locker room, remember that you are still in a public space – wipe up hairs and other mess, shower quickly if there’s a queue, and try not to take up more than your share of space on benches and countertops. Bear in mind, too, that not everyone is comfortable with the same level of public nudity, so respect others’ personal space and avoid lounging about in the buff unnecessarily. Join Virgin Active Get discounted gym membership at Virgin Active with Vitality*. A joining fee will apply. Find out more *Selected Vitality products only. Minimum monthly premiums and terms and conditions apply.