Health & Wellbeing at Home Virtual Member Events. Health & Wellbeing at Home Every month the Vitality Coaches and Experts host health & wellbeing events that aim to provide you with in-depth discussions on topics from mental health to nutrition to menopause to fitness and more. These video conversations answer the questions submitted by you prior to the event and aim to encourage healthier habits and behaviours. many of the wellbeing sessions also feature voices from people who wanted to share their stories to help others. Below you can access all previous conversations. Mental Health Awareness Have you noticed the conversation around mental health changing? Are you pleased to hear more people opening up about their experiences? Would you like to help your workplace be more supportive to positive mental health? The landscape around Mental Health has been changing for a while now. The stigma is falling away, people are becoming more open to discussing their experiences and workplaces are introducing more ways to improve mental health amongst employees. It is becoming increasingly important to develop skills to help ourselves and others deal with difficulties in the workplace as well as their personal lives. You will learn: – How to protect and maintain positive mental health – How to identify poor mental health in others – How to initiate conversations and support others towards better mental health Watch the full discussion here – Menopause: Real People, Real Stories Menopause. It’s a natural, inevitable life transition for half the population, but are we giving it the attention it deserves? Would you know what symptoms to expect or how to talk about it with friends, family and colleagues? Even if you won’t experience menopause, would you feel comfortable supporting the people around you who will? To celebrate World Menopause Day, we are teaming up with menopause support pioneer, Peppy, for a virtual event that is open to everyone. Whether you’re interested for personal reasons, to help look after a loved one or simply to build your awareness, you will take away answers, insight and real-life experiences of menopause. What to expect: – ‘What you need to know’: An introduction by menopause expert Kathy Abernethy, former chair of the British Menopause Society – ‘How menopause impacted my life’: Personal stories from real people – An anonymous audience Q&A, so your questions can be answered Watch the full webinar here – Is It Ever Time to Man-Up? Societal Expectations; the ways in which men and women have been traditionally expected to behave may play a role in mental health. For men, societal expectations about how men “should” behave and what masculinity is includes the expectation that men be the breadwinners of their family, and that they display what have traditionally been perceived as masculine traits like strength, stoicism, dominance, and control. While wanting to feel, and feeling, strong and in control are not inherently negative things, some research suggests that a reliance on these traditional ideals as what it means to be “a man” may negatively impact men’s mental health. With men under-represented in statistics related to seeking and accessing help and yet over-represented in statistics related to suicide which represents the largest cause of death for men under 50, is it time men started to ‘man up’ when talking about mental health? Panel: – Vitality Coach & Chair – Jamie Monk Vitality Coach, – Mental Health & Wellbeing Specialist – Henri Saha – *Special guest* The panel will be joined by British Paracanoeist legend (Rio Olympic Champion and 8-time World Champion) and Vitality Performance Champion Emma Wiggs. Watch the full discussion here – Boosting Your Immunity For the Winter Months As winter approaches and cold/flu season seems to be coming around yet again, are there things that we can do from a nutrition standpoint to help protect ourselves? Panel: – Vitality Coach & Chair – Jake Sanders – Vitality Coach & Specialist in Nutrition & Lifestyle – James Vickers – Special guest and Nutrition expert Angela Steel from SuperWellness Watch the full discussion here – Losing Those Lockdown Pounds Focusing on the topic of weight loss so join us for an interactive session to understand and overcome the main barriers to getting the body you desire. Our Vitality Coaches will be offering their expertise, help and advice in the form of regular, online Q&A sessions. Panel: – Chair – Jake Sanders – Wellbeing & Mental Health – Henri Saha – Nutrition & Lifestyle – James Vickers – Physical Activity & Exercise – Jamie Monk & Jonny Kibble Watch the full discussion here – How To Form Healthy Habits We will be exploring how to create healthy habits in relation to diet, exercise and mental wellbeing. Our Vitality Coaches will be offering their expertise, help and advice in the form of regular, online Q&A sessions. Panel: – Chair – Jake Sanders – Wellbeing & Mental Health – Henri Saha – Nutrition & Lifestyle – James Vickers – Physical Activity & Exercise – Jamie Monk & Jonny Kibble Watch the full conversation here – House Sharing & Home Working We will be focusing on the topic of continuing to work from home whilst house sharing with others. Panel: – Chair – Jake Sanders – Wellbeing & Mental Health – Henri Saha – Nutrition & Lifestyle – James Vickers – Physical Activity & Exercise – Jamie Monk & Jonny Kibble Watch the full conversation here – Work-Life Balance Focusing on the topic of work/life balance; What is it? Can it be maintained/improved? Is a perfect balance even possible?Our Vitality Coaches will be offering their expertise, help and advice in the form of regular, online Q&A sessions. Please do submit your questions if you have something specific you’d like covering. Panel: – Chair – Jake Sanders – Wellbeing & Mental Health – Henri Saha -Nutrition & Lifestyle – James Vickers – Physical Activity & Exercise – Jamie Monk Watch the full conversation here – Healthy Parents This week the conversation will be exploring the topic of staying healthy whilst working from home and balancing childcare needs. Panel: – Wellbeing & Mental Health – Henri Saha (Chair) – Wellbeing & Mental Health, Mother of 1 – Melissa Britton – Physical Activity, Movement and Physio – Father of 1 – Andrew Magill Watch the full conversation here – Want to join in on the events as they’re happening? You can find a full list of upcoming discussions and interactive events with our Member Only Events Calendar . You can also join our Member Only Facebook Group for updates, exclusive content and exciting discussions.