Healthy festive cheese bites. These bite-size appetisers add variety and texture to a big platter and allow your guests to try several different fla­vours. To prep ahead, you could always make the cheese bites the morning of your event (or the night before) and just roll them in their toppings before guests arrive. SERVES 10-12 Cheese bites ingredients (makes 40): 2 x 230g packs of cream cheese, at room temperature 2 tbsp crème fraîche 2 tsp Worcestershire sauce 50g shredded Cheddar cheese 55g shredded hard cheese (such as Gruyère or Parmesan) Fine sea salt Freshly ground black pepper 30g crumbled blue cheese 65g chopped pecans 35g chopped dried apricots 60g slivered almonds 50g chopped pistachios 32g chopped fresh herbs (such as thyme, sage, rosemary) Spread ingredients: 20 carrot batons (large matchstick pieces from about 5 large carrots) 20 celery sticks (from about 6 celery stalks) 20 radish slices (from about 4 small radishes) 230g sesame sticks 230g crackers 420g mixed nuts Method: To make the cheese bites: Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Use a sturdy spatula to mix together the cream cheese, crème fraîche, Worcester­shire sauce, Cheddar cheese, and Gruyère. Season with salt and pepper. Portion out a small ball of the cheese mixture. Roll the ball between your wet hands to create an evenly spherical cheese bite and place it on the prepared baking sheet. Repeat with the rest of the cheese mixture. Cover and let chill for at least 2 hours. Set out three shallow dishes. Mix together the blue cheese and chopped pecans in one dish, apricots and almond pieces in another, and pistachios and herbs in the last. Remove the cheese bites from the refrigerator and roll each ball in one of the mixtures until completely coated. Transfer to a serving platter and repeat with the rest of the cheese bites. Let them sit at room temperature for at least 20 minutes before serving. To serve Pile cheese bites on the platter. Fill the empty space with carrot slices, celery sticks, radish slices and crackers. Recipe extracted from Platters and Boards (£18.99, Chronicle Books) by Shelly Westerhausen.