How Vitality Can Help You Save. Did you know that Vitality members receive millions of pounds worth of benefits and rewards every year (Vitality statistics, 2018)? That’s because we reward healthy behaviour – from getting your steps in and your heart rate up, to buying healthy food and meditating a few times a week. Want to know more about how we can help save? Read on… Eat well and save with… Waitrose & Partners Eating well is a key ingredient in being healthy. To make it easier and more rewarding to take the good food option, we’ll reward you with cashback on healthy food. Join Vitality on an eligible plan and you could get up to 25% cashback on selected Waitrose & Partners Good Health products (excluding beverages) when you get active. Get a second eligible health insurance or life insurance plan, and receive a Vitality Pink boost, with up to 40% cashback. Terms and conditions apply. WW Instead of paying a monthly fee of £21.45 (correct as of October 2018), Vitality members could get a WW Digital + StudioTM six-month plan for just £30. And, if you go to at least two Wellness Workshops a month, we’ll extend it for another six months – saving you more than £200 over a year. Have a look here for more info, eligibility and terms and conditions. Keep fit and save with… Virgin Active, Nuffield Health & David Lloyd Encouraging our members to stay active is important to us. That’s why, depending on your plan type, eligible Vitality Health members get up to 50% off monthly gym memberships at selected Virgin Active, Nuffield Health and David Lloyd clubs, while eligible Vitality Life members can get up to 40% off. A joining fee applies. Choose from a range of activities – like fitness classes, swimming, tennis and more (depending on the facilities available at your chosen club). Have a look at Virgin Active , Nuffield Health and David Lloyd on our website for more info, eligibility and terms and conditions. Runners Need There’s no substitute for quality kit to motivate you on your fitness journey. With this in mind, eligible Vitality members can get up to 50% off any pair of running shoes (including sale items), up to a maximum of one pair per member, per plan year. Also, members can now get up to 15% off full priced items, excluding electronics, helping you to look and feel the part. Have a look here for more info, eligibility and terms and conditions . Chill out and save with… Headspace We recognise that mental health is just as important as physical health when it comes to your overall wellbeing. Everyday mental wellness app Headspace is one of the leading apps on the market and as a Vitality member, you can get 30% off an annual subscription. This means you’ll pay £50.32 instead of £71.88 – a saving of £21.56! Get started by downloading the app for free, then log in to the Vitality Member app to generate your discount code. Link Headspace to Vitality and start earning points by completing mindful activities. You’ll also get access to the 10-day Basics course. Have a look here for more info, eligibility and terms and conditions. Amazon Prime Amazon Prime gives you access to fast delivery, music and video streaming and more. An annual membership normally costs £79 but with us, you could pay less. Complete your Online Health Review and link a compatible activity tracker to your Vitality account. Then, get active and if you earn 160 Vitality activity points in a month, the next month is on us. Earn 160 points every month and you could pay nothing for a whole year. Have a look here for more info, eligibility and terms and conditions . If you’re a Vitality health insurance member and would like to see more ways Vitality can help you save, have a look at our savings calculator . If you’re a Vitality life insurance member, check out the calculator here.