How to make plant-based coconut yoghurt. Want a dairy-free alternative to Greek-style yoghurt? “Coconut yoghurt is something that we can now get in most supermarkets. While making it from scratch can be time-consuming, it is so worth it for the amazing flavour and texture,” says plant-based chef Bettina Campolucci Bordi. Makes 1 x 500g jar Ingredients: 150g cashews 250ml coconut water Meat of 1 young green coconut (buy ready-to-use or open a coconut and scrape it out yourself) Half a probiotic capsule Method: Start by soaking the cashew nuts for two hours; just put them in a bowl and cover with water. Open up the coconut with a coconut opener or with a cleaver at a 90-degree angle. Be careful if you have not done this before. Drain and reserve the water, then scrape out the coconut meat, cutting off any brown parts that come away from the bottom of the coconut. Drain the cashews and tip them into a blender with the coconut meat, coconut water and probiotic, then blitz until you get a smooth texture. If you are doing this in a high-speed blender, make sure you don’t overheat the mixture as this will kill off the probiotics. Once blended, transfer to a glass or plastic container. Do not use a metal container as the mixture won’t ferment. Leave outside the fridge for 24 hours with a tea towel or muslin cloth (cheesecloth) on top, so that the mixture can breathe. After 24 hours your mixture will be slightly fizzy and bubbly, which means it has fermented. Give it a good mix, put a lid on the container and leave it in the fridge for later use. It will last for up to seven days in the fridge. Flavour your yoghurt with lemon zest, vanilla, orange zest or sweetener of choice. I personally love a squeeze of maple syrup and a drop of vanilla extract. Tip: If you would like a quick coconut yoghurt, skip the probiotic and fermentation step and use the mixture straight after blending it into a silky smooth texture. To make it nut free, use sunflower seeds instead of cashews. Recipe extracted from Happy Food by Bettina Campolucci Bordi (Hardie Grant, £20). Photography © Nassima Rothacker