Joe Root’s #MySummerGoal journey. English cricket captain Joe Root shares his active goal for the summer and his advice for keeping your head in the game How do you go from practicing on the driveway at five years old to captaining the English cricket team? We share the secrets to Joe’s success and his tips on how to stay motivated for your #MySummerGoal. Watch the video here or read Joe’s story below. https://magazine.vitality.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Vitality_JoeROot_MySummerGoalStory_V2.mp4 What’s the biggest career goal you’ve achieved so far? Winning The Ashes. It’s been a dream of mine since I was young. How did it feel to achieve that? Absolutely amazing. As a team we felt very emotional ­– we’d put so much hard work into getting there over the months, even years. How did you go about achieving such a big goal? The journey started on the driveway at home as a five-year-old. Then, along the way, there have been lots of little milestones that kept me in the moment. The goals of trying to play in bigger teams through County schools teams, then Yorkshire and finally England have all been milestones along the way. What’s the best advice you’ve ever been given to meet your goals? Set small, achievable milestones. One step at a time. What’s your #MySumme r Goal ? I have two. I’m aiming to ride 20 miles per week on a road bike and to be a successful captain. How do you keep the momentum going? I always have the next goal in mind and to get there it’s really about sheer hard work. Do you have any advice for disciplining yourself when it comes to sticking to your goals? When I’ve been particularly lazy, I kick-start myself again with an intense gym session or some hill runs. What do you do when you feel like you’re failing or having a wobble? I’d think it’s important to take a step back, think things through and trust your methods. The key is to keep thinking realistically and rationally. Remember how far you’ve come and how much you’ve already achieved. What’s on your motivational playlist? Muse, Arctic Monkeys and The Courteeners. Who’s your biggest inspiration? My biggest inspiration is The Don – my grandfather. What’s your motivational mantra? There’s a great quote from Only Fools and Horses: “He who dares Rodney, he who dares,” which sums up Del Boy’s ambition and optimism. When playing a game, it’s got to be: “If you ain’t first, you’re last.” How do you reward yourself when you achieve your goals? I like to get together with teammates and loved ones to celebrate. What’s your biggest vice? Fish and chips! Joe inspires through his actions and embodies Vitality’s values to make positive lifestyle choices. Meet the rest of our Vitality Ambassadors .