Let’s Run Together with Runners Need. Advertorial Whether it’s 5k, 10k, or just OK, Runners Need are all about helping you to get out there, keep fit and reach your goals in 2019 and beyond. We’re taking a look at our latest Vitality Rewards Partner to find out why they’re the place to find the best brands around and get friendly expert advice, whatever your fitness goals look like. Runners Need believe it’s never too late to start running. Even their founder, Chris Bould, didn’t start running until he was 26. He went on to run the London Marathon, but like everyone else, he had to start somewhere. Established in 1982, Runners Need has been helping people get out there to train, run and keep fit in any way they can for over 30 years. They do this with the help of the best sportswear brands, quality kit and friendly experts who love to run and want to share their passion with you. Runners Need also believe that a great running experience begins with the right shoe, so they dedicate themselves to finding the perfect fit for everyone, offering free expert gait analysis and professional fitting in every store. Because the VIP treatment shouldn’t just be reserved for the pros. But it’s not all about the shoes; Runners Need love to run and this means they’re always on the lookout for the latest innovations in performance and technology, to help you get the most out of every run. They’re passionate about helping their customers keep fit with the best kit out there, from footwear to clothing, nutrition, hydration and gadgets. Whether you know what you’re after or need a bit of inspiration, their in-store experts will happily share their knowledge and experience with you. Because it’s all about supporting and inspiring people to get out there and keep fit in every way they can. When they’re not kitting out their customers, they’re busy leading weekly Run Clubs from their stores all over the UK, and hosting exclusive events to help support, motivate and inspire the running community. It really is about creating a great experience for customers, in-store, online and on the run. As a Vitality member, you could get up to 50% off a pair of sports shoes with Runners Need . Available with eligible health insurance , life insurance and investments plans. Log in to Member Zone for the details. Shop at Runners Need in-store and online – all you need to get the discount is your Vitality membership number, plus a form of ID for in-store purchases. Want to find out more? Have a look at the Runner’s Need page in Member Zone . Let’s run together. Running Vitality Reward Partners