Looking after your mind & body: Member-only exclusive online events. Throughout the month, the Vitality Coaches and Experts will be helping to look after your mental health and physical health with virtual online events that you can tune into from the comfort of your home, during your lunchbreak. Don’t forget to join our Member Only Facebook Group too – you’ll get daily reminders of the events with links, plus extra exclusive content from daily inspiration, recipes, workouts, competitions & more. We have our regular daily sessions on mindfulness, HIIT workouts, wellbeing webinars & more. Mindful Mondays Every Monday you’ll be able to practice mindfulness with a guided 30 minute session from one of our mental health experts. Mindfulness practices can help us to increase our ability to regulate emotions, as well as decrease stress, anxiety and depression. It can also help us focus our attention and observe our thoughts and feelings. As we become more present, it can help us to make better decisions, to manage our emotions and to be fully engaged. Monday 2nd August – Time: 12.30pm – 1pm – What: Resistance – What does it mean if we are feeling resistance? Join on the day Monday 9th August – Time: 12.30pm – 1pm – What: Pressure – Where it is coming from and how to deal with it. Join on the day Monday 16th August – Time: 12.30pm – 1pm – What: Expectations – Are you a perfectionist or setting yourself up to fail? Join on the day Monday 23rd August – Time: 12.30pm – 1pm – What: Change – The only thing that is consistent is the inevitability of change. Join on the day Turn Up Tuesdays – HIIT Sessions Every Tuesday you can join one of our Vitality Coaches and qualified personal trainers for a 30m blast of high intensity exercise interspersed with low intensity recovery periods. Our HIIT sessions are designed for everyone no matter what level of fitness you are – from beginner to advanced you’ll be able to join in. This is a perfect way to improve your muscle strength, cardiovascular fitness and muscle toning all with minimal equipment required. Get ready to get a sweat on! Tuesday 3rd August – Time: 12.30pm – 1pm – What: Hip Mobility and Strength We focus on moving the hip joint in a wide range of motion to improve strength, flexibility, power and function to help you perform every day tasks better. Join on the day Tuesday 10th August – Time: 12.30pm – 1pm – What: Yoga with Virgin Active Lead Activist Char will be breathing new life into our sessions helping you to stretch, improve flexibility and become more mindful of your body. Join on the day Tuesday 17th August – Time: 12pm – 12.30pm – What: Lower Back Strengthening Designed to help desk-based workers to build on strengthening muscles that support the lower back to help improve movement and alleviate pain Join on the day Tuesday 24th August – Time: 12pm – 12.30pm – What: Boxing with Virgin Active Boxing Champ Activist Amy will be creating a punchy workout to help improve your cardiovascular fitness, strength and technique. No equipment required! Join on the day Tuesday 31st August – Time: 12pm – 12.30pm – What: Build Bulletproof Knees Jonny and Jamie will guide you through a body weight workout designed to strengthen the muscles which specifically support and protect the knees! Join on the day Wellness Wednesdays On Wednesdays we’ll be sharing with you wellness content across our channels to help you focus on your physical and mental health. Although we absolutely loved delivering the Pink Stanley sessions for kids, with the announcement of schools re-opening, we have decided it is time for us to adjust our programme once again. We are delighted and excited to introduce ‘Straight Talk’. These sessions will be delivered every other Wednesday at 12-12:30pm. Wednesday 4th August – Time: 12 – 12.30pm – What: Coaches Corner: Pure Sport CBD Former professional rugby player and Co-Founder Grayson Hart discusses how his journey with CBD led to building a community centred business. Join the event Wednesday 11th August – Time: 12.30pm – 1.30pm – What: Coaches Corner: Individualised Nutrition Our expert nutritionists discuss creating an eating structure tailored to your needs and how to distinguish between calorie quantity and quality. Join the event Wednesday 18th August – Time: 2pm – 3pm – What: Sleep Detective We explore the science behind sleep, creating the perfect conditions and how sleep affects performance Register for the event Pilates Thursdays In February we introduced an alternative form of exercise with Louise Buttler who has been teaching Pilates every Thursday, 1:30-2pm. We think Louise’s teaching is absolutely brilliant and have been delighted to receive so much positive feedback regarding her sessions. It is therefore with great pleasure that we will be continuing to offer her sessions every Thursday in March. Thursday 5th August – Time: 1.30 – 2pm – What: Yoga with Milly A slow and steady flow perfect for all levels. We will activate stabiliser muscles and re-align our posture. Join the event Thursday 12th August – Time: 1.30 – 2pm – What: Yoga with Milly This session is all about opening the chest, hips and side of the body while switching on core muscles. Join the event Thursday 19th August – Time: 1.30 – 2pm – What: Yoga with Milly We will be focussing on moving with fluidity and breath the strengthen the whole body Join the event Thursday 26th August – Time: 1.30 – 2pm – What: Yoga with Milly A session to relieve tightness, release stress and improve your body’s efficiency and performance Join the event Feel Good Fridays We like positivity and feeling good on Fridays, and that can be inspired by access to information that helps you achieve your goals. You can join our Vitality coaches, plus some very special guests answering your questions on mental health, nutrition and diet and physical activity. To send in your questions you just need to register for the events where you can ask anything you would like to. Friday 6th August – Time: 12.30 – 1pm – What: Beginners Low Intensity Workout A more gentle approach to improving cardio fitness. Join the event Friday 13th August – Time: 12.30 – 1pm – What: Knee Friendly Workout Build strength and power whilst remaining grounded Join the event Friday 20th August – Time: 12.30 – 1pm – What: Low Intensity Body Movement Develop whole body strength at a manageable pace Join the event – Time: 2 – 3pm – What: Making Nutrition Easy: Theory vs. Practice Struggling to eat what we know we should? Register for the event Friday 27th August – Time: 12.30 – 1pm – What: Low Impact Mobility Burpees and sprint free workout to get you feeling fit Join the event – Time: 2 – 3pm – What: Understanding Elite Sports Nutrition How professional athletes fuel for performance. Register for the event Want to re-watch some of our webinars with the Vitality coaches? You can have a look at some of the Health & Wellbeing at Home virtual events .