Mental Health Awareness Week: Online Events Calendar. Monday 10th May Mental Health Awareness (Live) Time: 10.30am What: Understand how to protect positive mental health and how to identify poor mental health in others. Register for the event Mindful Mondays – Live meditation Time: 12.30pm What: Nature – This year’s theme is nature, so let’s explore how it can help our mental health? Join the live event Live Q&A: Answering your mental health questions Time: 3pm What: Join us for this interactive session where we answer all of the questions you really would like to ask. Join the event and ask a question Tuesday 11th May Mental Health: How to Support Others Effectively Time: 10.30am What: We explain the importance of your role in supporting others and how to create effective conditions. Register for the event Mindful Yoga Time: 12.30pm What: A guided 30min yoga session suitable for all experience levels, no equipment needed. Find your inner peace & join in with our yoga session Live Q&A: Answering your mental health questions Time: 3pm What: Join us for this interactive session where we answer all of the questions you really would like to ask. Join the event and ask a question Wednesday 12th May Mental Health: Understanding Stress and Anxiety Time: 10.30am What: We learn what the stress response is, implications of chronic stress and how to reduce symptoms. Register for the event Mindfulness Live Session Time: 12.30pm What: Compassion – Can we show more to ourselves and others? Join our live mindful session to learn being compassionate Live Q&A: Answering your mental health questions Time: 3pm What: Join us for this interactive session where we answer all of the questions you really would like to ask. Join the event and ask a question Thursday 13th May Mental Health: Positive Wellbeing Strategies Time: 10.30am What: We will cover how to slow things down when we ‘get caught up’ and how to reduce this from happening. Register for the event Mindfulness Live Session Time: 12.30pm What: Patience – Do the best things come to those who wait? Join our live mindful session to learn being compassionate Live Pilates Session with Louise Buttler Time: 1.30pm What: Musculoskeletal rehabilitation and posture focus. Join in with Louise for some lunchtime Pilates Live Q&A: Answering your mental health questions Time: 3pm What: Join us for this interactive session where we answer all of the questions you really would like to ask. Join the event and ask a question Friday 14th May Live Mindful Walk, Jog or Run Time: 12.30pm What: Exercise is one of the best forms of connecting with nature and getting outside. Mental health also benefits from getting outside so for this mindfulness session we’ll be heading outside! Get outside and practice mindfulness The Big Interview with Jonny Wilkison, Vitality Ambassador and former rugby union player Time: 2pm What: We talk to a true sporting legend about his views on mental health, his challenges and what he’s learned about himself throughout his incredible career. Register for the event & hear Jonny Wilkinson discuss mental health We have more health and wellbeing events running throughout every month including May. Don’t forget to see what other events we have happening throughout the month of May ! If you’re a Vitality Member, why not join our member-only Facebook group ? A way to connect with other members and share tips and advice, plus we have daily exclusive content from our Vitality Coaches to help you stay fit and healthy in mind and body.