Mindful Baking: Peanut Butter Chocolate Chip Cookies. You can’t beat that incredible feeling when you share the love through homebaked cookies. Here’s how to master the art… (with no added sugar) For the last few weeks, master baker Matt Adlard has been taking us step by step through some incredible homebaked recipes that we might not otherwise attempt – and the results from the Vitality community has been incredible. From rosemary focaccia to your own pasta to a flourless chocolate dessert , you have all been flexing your culinary muscles, learning new skills and enjoying the meditative tranquility and fulfilment of making your own. Hungry for more? Then this week’s recipe makes the perfect weekend treat, it’s super-easy to master and leaves out the sugar. Salty yet sweet, here’s everything you need to make your own peanut butter chocolate chip cookies… Ingredients Makes 8-10 Cookies 140g Coconut sugar 300g Natural, smooth peanut butter 40g Coconut flour 35g Melted butter (or coconut oil) 2 Eggs 2 Tbsp Maple syrup 1 Tsp Baking soda 1/2 Tsp Salt 1/2 Tsp Vanilla bean paste Handful of chocolate chips Sea salt to finish Add the peanut butter, eggs, vanilla and melted butter to a large bowl and stir to combine. Next, add in the remaining dry ingredients (excluding the chocolate chips) and stir everything together until you have a smooth cookie dough. Cover the dough and refrigerate for one hour. Scoop the chilled dough out using an ice cream scoop or weigh each dough ball into 70g pieces. Place the cookie dough balls, evenly spaced apart, on to a baking sheet lined with parchment. Bake them in a preheated oven at 175C for 15m. Halfway through the bake, remove the tray of cookies and use the bottom of a mug or a glass to press the cookie ball down into a nice even disc. Continue to bake for a further 7 minutes. Remove them from the oven and immediately add the chocolate chips on top of the cookie with some flaked sea salt to finish. Allow to cool completely before serving. In case you missed it, check out Matt Adlard’s mindful baking recipe for rosemary and red onion focaccia , pasta three ways or flourless chocolate cake .