Mindful Baking: Step-by-Step Flourless Chocolate Cake. Published: 15 May 2020. Struggling to get your hands on flour but still want to make a showstopper bake? Then look no further than this decadent flourless chocolate cake – all brought to life by super home baker, Matt Adlard … Not only is cake-making proven to be good for your mental health , but you get the added bonus of showstopping results, such as this decadent gluten-free chocolate cake at the end of your efforts. Let’s bakeeeeee! INGREDIENTS 230g Chocolate (70% Cocoa solids, chopped) 80g Coconut oil or unsalted butter 75g Coconut sugar or caster/light brown sugar 6 Large eggs (split into whites and yolks) Pinch salt TO SERVE Cocoa powder to dust Whipped cream and fruit METHOD Pre-heat your oven to 150c. Lightly grease a 9-inch springform pan with butter and then tip in 2 tbsp of cocoa powder. Shake the cocoa powder around the tin so that it is fully coated, then tip out the excess. Into a large bowl add your chopped chocolate and coconut oil (or butter). Melt it in the microwave or over a pan of gently simmering water until smooth. Set it to one side to cool for a few minutes. Once it has cooled slightly, slowly drizzle in the eggs yolks, whisking constantly so that they don’t scramble. Once fully incorporated, set the chocolate mixture aside. Into a large bowl or the bowl of a stand mixer, add the egg whites and a pinch of salt. Whisk them until they begin to get frothy then slowly add the sugar, about a teaspoon at a time, waiting a few seconds between each addition. Once you have added all the sugar, keep whisking until the mixture thickens and the meringue holds a medium peak. Take ⅓ of the meringue mixture and gently fold it into the chocolate mixture you set aside. Fold it with a spatula just until the meringue is incorporated. Be careful not to over mix it. Once it is mixed in, add the ⅔ of meringue and fold it in again. Finally, fold in the remaining meringue. Take the cake batter and pour it into the springform tin. Place it into the oven for 40 minutes or until a skewer comes out clean. Every oven is different so keep an eye on it. Once baked, allow to cool for 45 minutes before removing the side of the springform pan. Slice and serve, topping with whipped cream and berries. Hungry for more? Discover the recipe for Rosemary and Red Onion Focaccia