Mindful Baking: Step-By-Step Rosemary And Red Onion Focaccia. Published: 7 May 2020 Never made bread before? Scared to get started? Then look no further as we take you through this simple step-by-step guide to making your own fantastic focaccia – all brought to life by super home baker, Matt Adlard… From the smell of a freshly-baked loaf filling your home, to the first bite of a homemade hunk of bread, to the scientific evidence that cooking and baking is beneficial for your mental health … When it comes to baking your own bread, there are tons of brilliant benefits. But for many of us, the idea of home baking feels a little outside our culinary comfort zone. To help you out, we’ve invited master home baker Matt Adlard to give you the skills you need to bake your own delicious rosemary and red onion focaccia in this Mindful Baking video masterclass. See below for the ingredients you’ll need and Matt’s video tutorial, and check in next week for the next episode of our ‘Mindful Baking with Matt Adlard’ series, where we’ll be making f lourless chocolate cake! INGREDIENTS 600g Strong white bread flour (or plain flour) 10g Salt 15g Fresh yeast or 7.5g instant yeast (if you struggle to 455g Tepid water 25g Olive oil TOPPING 2-3 Sprigs fresh rosemary 1 Red onion Sea salt flakes 100g Olive oil METHOD In a large bowl, mix together your flour and salt. Add your water to a jug along with the yeast and stir together. Pour the liquid into the flour mixture along with the oil. Mix together with your hand until all the liquid is absorbed and the dough is shaggy. Cover and allow to rest for 30 minutes. While it is resting, chop some fresh rosemary and stir this into about 100g of olive oil. Stir together. Set to one side. After 30 minutes, lightly wet your hand and stretch and fold the dough about five times. Take your hand and put it on the underside of the dough, lift and stretch to go back into the centre. Repeat this four more times around the bowl. Cover and rest the dough for 45 minutes. After 45 minutes, repeat this process again. The dough should be slightly softer and stretchier – be gentle not to knock too much air out. After 5 stretch and folds, cover and rest for another 45 minutes. Repeat the stretch and fold again after 45 minutes, then cover and rest for another 45 minutes. Take a large baking tray and cover the base with some rosemary olive oil. It shouldn’t be swimming in olive oil but be generous. Give your dough 2 or 3 stretches and folds, just to get it out of the bowl, and lift it into your tray so that the smooth side is facing up. Use your fingers to spread the dough to the edges. It will be a little difficult initially but just keep at it. Pour more of the olive oil over the top and dimple the dough with your fingers, pressing right down to the bottom. Sprinkle some sea salt flakes on top. Cover the dough and allow it to proof for 45/60 minutes. Meanwhile, pre-heat your oven to 200° C. When the dough has risen, sprinkle some more sea salt flakes over the top, then place a few whole rosemary leaves on top, along with the sliced red onion. Use your fingers to dimple the dough. Bake it for 30 to 45 minutes or until nice and golden brown. Once out of the oven, immediately spread more olive oil on top.