Mindful Baking: Homemade Pasta three ways. Making your own homemade pasta gives maximum fulfilment and requires minimum ingredients. Here’s how to master this incredible new culinary skill with a little help from master home baker, Matt Adlard… If you have been following along with our Matt Adlard Mindful Baking series, you will have mastered a delicious pillowy rosemary foccacia , you’ll have dessert nailed through our flourless chocolate cake , and now you’ll be able to master homemade pasta – not one, but three different ways. See below for the ingredients you’ll need and Matt’s step-by-step video tutorial. Ingredients 300g Semolina Flour 3 Large Eggs To make your pasta dough Pour the semolina onto your work surface and create a well with your hands. Crack the eggs into the well and then whisk them together with a fork. Use a spatula or a plastic scraper to incorporate the semolina flour into the eggs. Keep mixing it all together until there is no more semolina flour left and it is all absorbed. It might look a little dry initially but just keep mixing it and it will come together. Once the dough is in one uniform ball, start to knead it. Hold the bottom of the dough with one hand, then using the palm of your other hand, stretch the dough out, pushing it away from you. Fold the dough back on itself, rotate it 90 degrees and then stretch it out again. Repeat this process for 5-10m, until the dough feels nice and smooth. Wrap the dough in clingfilm and chill it in the fridge for 30 minutes. Remove the dough from the fridge and cut it into 4 pieces. To make farfalle To make these beautiful pasta bow shapes, lightly flour the dough ball and using a rolling pin, roll it as thin as possible into a rough oval shape. Use a knife to cut the dough into an even rectangle. The rectangle needs to be roughly 6cm tall. Cut the rectangle in half lengthways and then use a fluted pastry wheel to cut rectangles of dough, about 7cm in width (they should be roughly 3cm tall). Take the rectangles of dough and use your finger and thumb to pinch the top and bottom edge together, into a bow-tie shape. To make pappardelle For these delicious flat pasta noodles, take the dough out and cut it into a neat rectangle as before. Lightly flour the top of the dough to stop it from sticking, and then fold it in on itself multiple times. Use a sharp knife to cut the dough into strips, roughly 2-3cm wide. Unravel the strips of dough and pile them together into the pappardelle. To make ravioli For ravioli, roll out 2 rectangles of dough. Flour your work surface (so that it doesn’t stick when you cut the raviolo) and take the first rectangle and spoon on a teaspoon of your ravioli filling into the middle of the dough, leaving about 4cm between each dollop. Whisk an egg until smooth and then brush the egg wash around the ravioli filling in a circular motion. Take the second rectangle of pasta dough and carefully lift this on top. Use your hands to cup the ravioli filling, trying to press out as much air as possible, and also applying enough pressure to glue to the top sheet of pasta to the bottom sheet. Use a fluted cookie cutter to cut around the ravioli filling, and then peel off the excess pasta. Hungry for more? Don’t forget to check out Matt Adlard’s mindful baking recipe for rosemary and red onion focaccia .