Mocktail, main and pudding: Three Jubilee recipes to try. Published: 1 June 2022 Celebrate the Jubilee bank holiday weekend with these fresh spins on classic dishes – perfect for the street party or your back garden! Here are three healthy Jubilee recipes for you to try this weekend. Jubilee recipe 1: Strawberry and basil virgin mojito Serves: 2 Prep time: 5 minutes, plus macerating V, Vg, DF, GF You’ll need: 30g basil 200g strawberries, hulled and finely chopped 2 tbsp caster sugar 2 limes, juiced 2 handfuls of crushed ice Lime soda water, to top up What to do: In a jug, add the basil, reserving 2 small sprigs for garnish, strawberries and caster sugar. Using the end of a wooden spoon, gently muddle together the strawberries and basil for 1 minute and leave to macerate for 20-25 minutes. Add the lime juice and divide between 2 tall glasses. Add the ice and lime soda water, stir to combine and garnish with the reserved basil leaves. Jubilee recipe 2: Roasted coronation chicken salad with charred baby gem Serves: 4 Prep time: 20 minutes Cook time: 50 minutes, plus cooling You’ll need: 1kg chicken thighs, skin-on, bone-in 1 tbsp medium curry powder, plus an extra pinch 2 tbsp olive oil 125g mango chutney 75g 0% fat Greek yoghurt 50g light mayonnaise A small handful of coriander, finely chopped 1 lemon, juiced ½ red onion, sliced 2 baby gem lettuces, trimmed and quartered 2 sticks of celery, sliced 100g of watercress 50g sultanas 1 apple, sliced (we used Pink Lady) 25g mini poppadoms To serve: Chive butter New potatoes What to do: Preheat the oven to 200°C/180°C fan/gas mark 6. In a large roasting tin, toss the chicken thighs with the curry powder, olive oil and some seasoning, ensuring they are evenly coated. Arrange skin-side up and roast for 30 minutes. Brush 100g of the mango chutney over the top of the chicken thighs and return to the oven for 20 minutes. Remove from the oven and leave to cool slightly. Meanwhile, mix the remaining mango chutney, Greek yoghurt, mayonnaise and coriander in a bowl. Season with a pinch of curry powder, salt and pepper and stir in 2 tbsp water. Add lemon juice to taste and add the remaining lemon juice to a small bowl with the red onion and a large pinch of salt. Leave to one side. Heat a griddle pan on high. Add the baby gem lettuce cut-side down and griddle for 1-2 minutes on each side until lightly scorched. Leave to cool slightly. Drain the red onion and combine with the celery, watercress, sultanas and apple. Add to a platter and top with the charred baby gem lettuce. Add any chicken resting juices from the roasting tin to the yoghurt and stir to combine. Tear the chicken into bite-size pieces using your hands and scatter on top of the salad. Spoon over some of the dressing and crush the poppadoms over the top. Serve with some chive butter, new potatoes and the remaining dressing on the side. NOTE: To make coronation chicken sliders, add the torn chicken to toasted buns with a smear of the dressing and a small handful of the salad. Jubilee recipe 3: Elderflower and lemon queen of puddings Serves: 6-8 Prep time: 20 minutes Cook time: 1 hour, plus cooling V You’ll need: 25g butter, plus extra to grease 60ml elderflower cordial 150g soft white breadcrumbs 600ml whole milk 130g caster sugar 1 lemon, zested ½ tsp vanilla extract 3 large eggs, yolks and whites separated Yellow food colour paste For the lemon curd: 2 lemons, zested and juiced 100g caster sugar 50g salted butter 2 large eggs To serve: Custard What to do: Grease a 1.5-litre baking dish. In a large bowl, combine the elderflower cordial with the breadcrumbs. In a large saucepan, gently heat the milk, butter and 30g of the sugar until warmed and the sugar and butter have melted. Remove the pan from the heat and add the lemon zest and vanilla. Preheat the oven to 150°C/130°C fan/gas mark 2. Add the breadcrumbs and leave to cool slightly for 15 minutes, then whisk in the egg yolks. Pour into the prepared dish and bake for 25-30 minutes until set but with a slight wobble in the middle. Meanwhile, to make the lemon curd add the lemon zest, juice, sugar, butter and eggs in a heatproof bowl over a pan of just simmering water. Whisk for 10-15 mins until thickened. Pour into a fine sieve over a clean bowl and allow to drip through. Leave to cool to room temperature. Preheat the oven to 150°C/130°C fan/gas mark 2. In a large bowl, whisk the egg whites until they form stiff peaks. Add the remaining sugar, a tbsp at a time, until thick and glossy. Add a drop of food colouring to give the meringue a pastel yellow hue. Transfer to a piping bag fitted with a star nozzle. Pour lemon curd over the cooked custard and pipe the meringue on top to cover the lemon curd. Bake for 20-25 minutes until the meringue is slightly browned. Serve hot with custard.