Nadiya Hussain’s spiced biscotti. Instead of mince pies, serve up these Italian biscuits – they’re packed with nuts and dried fruit. Makes 30 Serves: 10 Prep time: 20 minutes Cook time: 40 minutes, plus 30 minutes Ingredients: For the biscotti: 350g plain flour, plus extra for dusting 2 tsp baking powder 2 tsp mixed spice 250g golden caster sugar Zest of 1 orange 85g currants 85g dried cranberries 50g macadamia nuts, roughly chopped 50g pistachios, roughly chopped 3 large eggs, beaten For the syllabub dip: 300ml whipping cream 50g caster sugar Zest of 2 oranges Juice of ½ orange 4 tbsp whole milk Method: To make the biscotti: Preheat the oven to 180°C/gas mark 4 and line two baking sheets with greaseproof paper or silicone pads. Put the flour, baking powder, mixed spice and sugar into a bowl, and mix. Now add the orange zest, currants, cranberries, macadamia nuts and pistachios and give everything a quick mix. Add the beaten eggs and bring the dough together by hand. Turn the dough out on to a floured surface and divide it into two equal pieces. Roll them out to about 10cm wide and put each on a baking sheet. Bake for 35-40 minutes, until the dough has risen and is firm, though it should still look very pale. Take out of the oven and leave on the baking sheets. Turn the oven down to 140°C/gas mark 1. Using a bread knife, cut diagonal slices about 1cm wide. Lay the slices out on the baking sheets, and bake for a further 25-30 minutes until dry and golden. This may take longer – just keep testing until the biscuits are very dry. Leave the biscotti to cool on a wire rack. To make the syllabub dip: Whisk the cream and sugar until you have soft peaks. Add the orange zest and juice and mix through. Add the milk to slacken the mixture so it has the consistency of a dip. Serve in a dipping bowl alongside the biscotti. Extracted from Nadiya’s Kitchen by Nadiya Hussain (£20, Penguin) Photo: Holly Pickering Want more Christmas canapé ideas? Try Ruby Tandoh’s carrot and feta bites with lime yogurt .