Quick And Easy Family Snacks. When hunger calls, make these vibrant Disney-inspired bites a favourite for all the family. With these easy family snacks, eating and drinking healthily has never been so much fun. Whether you’re making Maui’s delicious rainbow toasts or Mickey’s fruity fusion waters, get creative with your whole family and reap the tasty benefits. Go on – tuck in! Maui’s Rainbow Toasts Serves: 1 Prep Time: 5 Minutes Power Peanut Butter Ingredients 1 slice of wholemeal bread 20g reduced-fat peanut butter ½ banana (50g), sliced 1 tsp honey 1 tsp granola Method Toast your preferred bread. Spread with peanut butter. Top with banana slices, drizzle with honey and sprinkle with granola for added crunch. Avocado and Coconut Toast Ingredients 1 slice of wholemeal bread 1 tsp coconut oil ½ small avocado (75g) 1 tsp lemon juice Optional: chilli flakes Method Toast your preferred bread. Spread a thin layer of coconut oil on the toast. Cut the half avocado into thin slices, place these on top of the toast and season to taste. For an extra flavour sensation,add a squeeze of zingy lemon juice and chilli flakes. Super Strawberry and Cream Cheese Toast Ingredients 1 slice of wholemeal bread 80g ripe strawberries 30g reduced-fat cream cheese Method Toast your preferred bread. Spread a generous layer of cream cheese on the toast. Wash the strawberries and cut into quarters. Layer the strawberry quarters on the cream cheese. Totally Tropical Toast Ingredients 1 slice of wholemeal bread ½ small avocado (75g) 2 tbsp lime juice 40g chopped mango 40g chopped pineapple Optional: chilli flakes Method Toast your preferred bread. Using Maui-like strength, mash the avocado in a bowl with the back of a fork. Add the zesty lime juice and season to taste. Spread the avocado mixture on the toast and top with chopped mango and pineapple. Add chilli flakes for extra colour and zing. Beastly Buffalo Bites Serves: 3 Prep time: 5 minutes Cooking Time: 20 minutes Ingredients: ½ tbsp cooking oil 535 g fresh cauliflower florets 2 tsp garlic powder A pinch of salt and pepper 1 tbsp butter, melted 170 g cayenne pepper sauce 150g tzatziki, for dipping Method: Preheat oven to 230ºC. Coat a baking sheet thinly with oil and set aside. Combine the garlic powder, salt, pepper, melted butter and cayenne pepper sauce in a small bowl to create your buffalo sauce mix. Place the cauliflower florets in a large plastic bag and pour in the buffalo sauce. Shake it until the florets are fully coated. Spread on to the baking sheet. Bake for 20 minutes. Serve with tzatziki. Fruity Fusion Waters Serves: 1 Prep Time: 5 minutes Ingredients Still or sparkling water For Donald’s water: a handful of blueberries and ½ an orange For Minnie’s water: blackberries and chunks of watermelon And for Mickey’s water: strawberry and lemon slices, plus 1 tbsp chia seeds Ice cubes Method For Donald’s water, cut the orange half into thin slices. Place the orange slices and blueberries into a bottle or glass. Add water and, if desired, ice cubes. Minnie fans should try infusing their water with sweet blackberries and chunks of watermelon. For a citrus boost, try Mickey’s water, infused with slices of strawberry and lemon, stirred in with the chia seeds. Looking for more inspiration? Why not try this fruit and oat breakfast bake ! Kids Recipes Snacks