Spatchcock chipotle chicken with grilled corn and peppers. This month, top chef and food writer Myles Williamson is giving us his brilliant BBQ recipes and tips. Serves: 6 portions Prepare: 30 minutes, plus marinating, barbecue setup and resting time Cook: 45 minutes Ingredients 1 Medium whole chicken (about 1.5kg), spatchcocked (see how to spatchcock a chicken , or ask your butcher to do it for you) 1 tbsp Fennel seeds 4 Whole cloves (or ½(half) tsp ground cloves) ½ tsp Ground cinnamon 2 Garlic cloves, finely crushed Small bunch fresh oregano, stalks roughly chopped Large bunch coriander, stalks finely chopped, leaves torn 100g Jar chipotle paste 3 Limes, zest and juice, plus wedges to serve For the corn 6 sweetcorn cobs, preferably husk-on Salted butter, to serve For the peppers 6 Red peppers 2 tbsp Olive oil 1 tbsp Sherry or red wine vinegar 2 Garlic cloves, finely chopped Method 1. Toast the fennel seeds and cloves in a small pan until fragrant. Bash in a pestle and mortar (or spice grinder) with the ground cinnamon and a large pinch of salt, until finely crushed. Add the garlic, coriander stalks and oregano to the pestle, crushing until smooth, before mixing in the chipotle paste, and the zest and juice of 2 limes (alternatively, whizz the crushed spices and other ingredients in a food processor until coarsely blended). Place the spatchcocked chicken in a deep bowl or roasting tray, season generously and then rub the marinade thoroughly all over the bird. Cover and chill for at least 2 hours (you can marinate up to 24 hours ahead). 2. Set up your barbecue. If using charcoal, light your barbecue 30-40 minutes ahead of time, let the coals turn ashen and glowing, then bank them to one side. Preheat a covered gas barbecue with the burners set over the highest heat for 10 minutes to get it nice and hot; if your gas barbecue doesn’t have a cooling shelf, leave one burner unlit when preheating and cooking, so that you’ve got a cool spot if everything is getting a little too hot. Remove the chicken from the fridge at least 30 minutes ahead of time so that it comes to room temperature before grilling. 3. Lift the chicken from the marinade and wipe off the excess. Grill, breast-side up, on a covered barbecue set over a medium-high heat (if using gas, reduce the heat in one of the burners so that you’ve got space to grill the chicken more moderately). After 20 minutes, uncover and turn the heat up to high. Cook the chicken, brushing with the excess marinade and turning every 10 minutes or so, until piping hot throughout and slightly charred (about 15-25 minutes more cooking or so). Rest under foil for at least 20 minutes. 4. Whilst the chicken cooks, grill the corns in their husks (you can also wrap them in foil or simply cook them naked, coated in oil, if you can’t find them with the husk on) on a medium-hot part of the barbecue, turning often until charred and the kernels are tender, about 10-12 minutes. 5. Grill the peppers on the hottest part of the barbecue, turning until they’re blackened all over. Place the hot peppers into a large bowl and cover with cling film. Once cool enough to handle, peel away the charred skin and discard with the seeds. Roughly tear the sweet red flesh and then mix in a clean bowl with the other ingredients; season. 6. Carve the rested bird and serve alongside the peppers and hot corn cobs, spread generously with butter. Scatter over the reserved coriander leaves and offer up some limes wedges as well. Tips – Cook the chicken in a closed barbecue and try to maintain a consistent high heat (around 170°C-190°C), adjusting the gas (or vents on a charcoal barbecue) as needed. You can also pre-cook it in a 180°C, gas mark 4 oven, before finish it off over the hot coals.