Stay motivated to run this winter. Running in the winter can be a joyous activity: the bright sun, blue skies and crisp air are a great way to clear away the cobwebs and make you feel refreshed after too much time spent indoors. It’s also a great way to relieve stress, get a bit of vitamin D and help relieve the winter blues, not to mention counteracting all the extra calories from those cold-weather comfort foods we all enjoy. However, winter running also has its flip side – those dark mornings or dreary evenings when it’s cold and wet, and the last thing you want to do is lace up your trainers and face the grim weather. Even the most dedicated runners sometimes struggle with motivation during the winter months, but never fear – there are many ways to encourage yourself to head out the door and complete that run. Here are our top tips for staying motivated to run this winter: Sign up for winter running events Training for a particular event can be a powerful motivator, especially in winter when it might otherwise seem harmless to skip the odd session. By committing to a winter race or a run in early spring, you’ll be forced to stick to your training schedule if you want to be ready for the event. The important thing is that you have a fixed date in mind by which time you need to accomplish your goal – that added focus is often all you need to keep your motivation levels high. Make it easier to get out of bed If you’re traditionally a morning runner but struggle to get out of bed on cold, dark mornings, there are a few steps you can take to make it easier for yourself. Try easing yourself into wakefulness with a lamp that simulates natural daylight – there are versions with an “alarm” function that gradually increase the light levels in your room to gently rouse you from slumber. Alternatively, set your alarm to play some cheerful tunes to encourage you to rise and shine. If you’re put off by the chill outside your covers, try setting the thermostat or timer on your heating to make sure the room is cosy and inviting when it’s time to get up – and hang your workout clothes near a radiator so they’re not too cool to put on. Dress appropriately The winter chill won’t seem quite as dire if you’re dressed appropriately for the weather . This is definitely the time for full-length running tights and a long-sleeved shirt, and most runners will add gloves and a hat or headband to cover their ears. Warmer winter running socks can be useful as well, and some runners switch to waterproof or insulated running shoes with a tougher grip to help cope with snow and icy conditions. In particularly cold weather you may also wish to add a lightweight fleece and a scarf to shield your face and neck, while wet or windy days call for a nylon shell or waterproof. Breathable, wicking fabrics are still important – you’ll get chilled quickly if you’re damp. That being said, be equally careful of overdressing – remember that your body will invariably heat up as you run, and if you’re wearing too much heavy, bulky clothing, you’ll end up overheated, tired, and feeling anything but refreshed by your workout. In general, aim to dress for weather that’s about seven degrees warmer than the actual temperature outside – ideally you should feel a bit chilled when you first leave the house, which will leave you room to warm up. Of course, each person is different, so wear what keeps you comfortable and you’ll be more likely to stick with your winter runs. Get a running buddy Going running with a friend is an effective motivational tool all year long, but especially in winter, when it’s far more tempting to settle in on the sofa with friends and family than to hit the cold pavements on your own. By making it a social event – and knowing that someone is counting on you to join them – you’ll be far less likely to skip a session when the television calls. Having a friend along can also help alleviate any safety concerns about running alone. If you don’t have a friend who is keen on running, consider joining a running group, such as our Vitality partner parkrun or you will find many local specialist shops such as our partner Sweatshop – where Vitality members also enjoy half price running shoes – and gyms organise these, with pacers who can cater to all levels of fitness, speed and endurance. Introduce some variety Remember that outdoor runs aren’t the only way you can train. Winter is an ideal time for cross-training and building up your strength in other ways , so spend some time on the elliptical trainer or doing body weight exercises to develop your running muscles. It’s fine to move some of your runs indoors to the treadmill, too, if you really can’t face the cold and dark outside. Just try to complete at least one outdoor run each week, perhaps on the weekend or during your lunch break, when you can get outdoors in the daylight. If possible (and it’s not too muddy) you may also find it inspiring to get off the roads and onto the trails – being in nature can help boost your mood and will make your winter runs feel more like an adventure than boring routine. Running Vitality Run Series