Terms and conditions – Vitality Magazine Winter 2022 Feedback Survey. The prize draw is open to all Eligible Participants who comply with these terms and conditions and only one entry per Eligible Participant is permitted. The Promoter reserves the right to refuse to award the Prize to anyone in breach of these terms and conditions. For the purposes of this prize draw: a) Prize Draw Period means from Wednesday 12th January 2022 to midnight on Saturday 12th March 2022, during which time the Eligible Participants may enter into the prize draw. Entries received after this time will not be counted, valid, accepted or considered; b) Draw Date means Monday 14th March 2022; c) Eligible Participant means any individual aged 18 years or over and resident in the United Kingdom, who complies with these terms and conditions. All members of staff of the Promoter and their families and any third parties or agencies connected with or involved in the administration of the prize draw will be excluded from winning the prize draw. Eligible Participants can enter the prize draw by completing the Vitality Magazine Winter 2022 Feedback Survey form and entering a valid email address into the form. d) Prize means one of five £100 Amazon Vouchers. e) Promoter means Vitality Corporate Services Limited (company number 05933141) of 3 More London Riverside, London SE1 2AQ trading as VitalityHealth, VitalityLife, VitalityInvest and VitalityCar. f) Data Protection Laws means all laws and regulations in the United Kingdom including the Data Protection Act 2018 and including laws and regulations of the European Union, the European Economic Area and their member states, applicable to the processing of Personal Data and the interception of communications in place from time to time during the course of the promotion. The prize draw is free to enter and no purchase is necessary. Entries will be entered into a prize draw and the winner will be drawn at random by the Promoter (supervised by an independent person) on the Draw Date. The Promoter accepts no responsibility for entries lost, stolen or unsuccessfully completed due to a technical fault, technical malfunction, computer hardware or software failure, satellite, network or server failure of any kind. The 5 (five) winners will be contacted within 48 hours of being selected via email. In the event that we fail to obtain confirmation from the winner, or the winner refuses the Prize or for whatever reason cannot accept the Prize, the original winner will forfeit the Prize immediately, and an alternative winner will be drawn and notified in accordance with these Terms & Conditions. The decision of the Promoter regarding any aspect of the prize draw is final and binding and no correspondence will be entered into about it. Other than as set out in clause 9, the Prize is not transferable, non-exchangeable and cannot be redeemed for cash. The Promoter reserves the right to substitute the Prize with another prize of similar value in the event the Prize is unavailable due to circumstances beyond the Promoter’s reasonable control. The Promoter reserves the right to void, cancel, suspend, or amend the Prize where it becomes necessary to do so including in the event of fraudulent behaviour. Insofar as is permitted by law, the Promoter, its agents or distributors will not in any circumstances be responsible or liable to compensate the winner or accept any liability for any loss, damage, personal injury or death occurring as a result of taking up the Prize except where it is caused by the negligence of the Promoter, its agents or distributors or that of their employees. The statutory rights of Eligible Participants are not affected. The prize draw will be governed by English law and Eligible Participants submit to the jurisdiction of the English courts. The name and county of the prize draw winner will be made available on request by writing to the Marketing department, Vitality Corporate Services Limited, 4th Floor, 70 Gracechurch Street, London, EC3V 0XL. The data you provide to Vitality through the Vitality Magazine Winter 2022 Feedback Survey will be used for the sole purpose of the Vitality Magazine and for selecting five winners of the prize draw. All data is stored securely and in accordance with the Vitality Privacy Notice . We will not share your personal data with any third party companies. Your email is requested solely for the purpose of contacting the winners from the prize draw, and will not be used otherwise. After the prize draw has been drawn, any data relating to you will be destroyed. When completing the form, you acknowledge that this requires you to share personal data including age, gender and email address with the Promoter for administrative and informative purposes. All Personal Data of Eligible Participants will be held and used by the Promoter for the purposes of the Vitality Magazine evaluation and to select prize draw winners in accordance with the Privacy Notice and Data Protection Laws.