The Big Sunday Cook Up: Meals. So, you’ve stocked up on the ingredients and followed the step by step guide , which means most of the hard work has been done! But here’s what you need to do each night to get your delicious meals on the table – pronto! MONDAY: Lamb Koftas with Flatbreads & Houmous Preheat the oven to 180°C, fan 160°C, gas 4; remove the koftas and houmous from the fridge. Put 200g low-fat natural yogurt, 200g strong white flour, 1 tsp baking powder and ½ tsp salt into a bowl, and mix until a dough forms. Turn out onto a lightly floured surface and knead briefly. Heat a large griddle pan over a high heat. Divide the dough into 8 balls then use a rolling pin to roll out each ball to a 5mm-thick oval. Griddle, in batches, for 2-3 minutes on each side. Brush the koftas with olive oil, then griddle for 2-3 minutes on each side. Transfer to a baking tray and cook in the oven for 10 minutes. Serve the koftas and some sliced tomatoes tossed with fresh mint, with the flatbreads and houmous. Kcals per serving: 600 Fat: 23g Saturates: 7g Sugar: 7g Salt: 95g Tip: You can use this super-simple dough recipe to make homemade pizza bases, too. TUESDAY: Roasted Aubergine & Chickpea Traybake with Mackerel Preheat the oven to 200°C, fan 180°C, gas 6 and remove the roasted aubergines from the fridge. Drain and rinse a 400g tin chickpeas, then put into a roasting tin. Add the aubergine, toss to combine, and heat in the oven for 20 minutes until warmed through. Remove from the oven, stir in 70g young leaf spinach until wilted, then divide between plates and top with 200g flaked honey-cured mackerel. Make a dressing by combining 200g low-fat yogurt, 2 tbsp tahini and the juice of 1 lemon. Drizzle the dressing over the salad, scatter over some chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley and serve with a chunk of warmed ciabatta. Kcals per serving: 403 Fat: 29g Saturates: 6.5g Sugar: 3g Salt: 0.7g Tip: Add this roasted aubergine to all kinds of salads. I love it stirred through bulgur wheat with roasted butternut squash, pomegranate and fresh herbs. WEDNESDAY: Tomato-baked Sausages with Thyme, Winter Mash & Peas Preheat the oven to 180°C, fan 160°C, gas 4. Remove the winter mash and 1 portion of the tomato sauce from the fridge. Spoon the tomato sauce into a 2-litre baking dish and arrange 8 pork chipolatas on top. Bake for 30 minutes, until the sausages are cooked through. Meanwhile, reheat the winter mash in the microwave (or in an ovenproof dish covered with foil alongside the sausage bake), and cook 320g frozen peas to pack instructions. Remove from the oven and scatter over fresh thyme. Divide the mash between plates, top with the sausages and serve with the peas on the side. Kcals per serving: 610 Fat: 29g Saturates: 10g Sugar: 17g Salt: 1.6g Tip: The ultimate versatile dish: you can use any sausages you like and can easily scale the quantities up or down depending on how many mouths you’re feeding. THURSDAY: Tomato & Chilli Tagliatelle with Rocket Remove the remaining tomato sauce from the fridge. Bring a large pan of water to the boil then add 400g tagliatelle and cook for 10 minutes until al dente. Meanwhile, heat 2 tbsp olive oil in a heavy-based frying pan over a high heat. Add 3 crushed garlic cloves and 1 tsp chilli flakes, then fry for 10-12 minutes, until fragrant. Add the tomato sauce to the pan and gently heat through. Drain the pasta and return to the pan, then add the tomato sauce and toss to combine. Season to taste then divide between bowls and serve topped with 70g rocket and a grating of fresh parmesan. Cals per serving: 536 Fat: 12g Saturates: 2.5g Sugar: 15g Salt: 0.2g Tip: This is a fab veggie dish, but if you want to add an extra savoury note, toss some chopped anchovy fillets into the pan with the garlic. FRIDAY: Family Shepherd’s Pie with Steamed Veg Remove the defrosted shepherd’s pie from the fridge. Preheat the oven to 190°C, fan 170°C, gas 5. Bake the pie for 30 minutes or until the filling is piping hot and the mash is golden. Meanwhile, steam 320g Tenderstem broccoli until just tender. Serve the pie with the veg on the side. Cals per serving: 425 Fat: 15g Saturates: 5g Sugar: 15g Salt: 0.3g Tip: It doesn’t get easier than this: just heat and eat. Just what you want on a Friday night.