The Vitality Faces return for the British 10k London Run. Frances Alcock I was very excited to be asked to run as part of the Vitality team for the London 10k. It was the very first 10k I ever ran 6 years ago in 2009 and I loved it. Many 10k’s later and following a couple of half marathons in the last year, I am looking forward to the buzz and the party atmosphere. Unfortunately preparation has not gone to plan. I am seeing a physiotherapist for my knee which has hindered my training and then I injured my big toe last Friday night running up some steps to catch a train. Today I went for a 10 mile cycle and I’ve decided to continue cycling this week for fitness and not to run again until Sunday. Today’s quote: ‘Life is like a pedal’ …they can push you down but you’ll always come back up. Richard Bazeley My last blog left off after the Vitality Reading Half Marathon with me targeting sub 3 hours at the London Marathon. I just missed out, running 3:03. After all those long runs my new training goal has been getting speedier over the shorter distances so I am now targeting the Vitality British 10k London, and my hope is to achieve a new PB going under 37:39. To do this I am focussing on speed intervals on the track and road runs with sections of threshold effort. I’m really excited to be running this 10k once again as a Vitality Face a) because I loved being a Vitality Face the first time round and b) all the previous Vitality Faces will be there too. I spent so much time reading their blogs and now I can meet them! Any race in London is always magical, there’s just something about London, and to run here again as a Vitality Face will top it off. Louise Cook The most enjoyable aspect of my Vitality journey has been engaging with other people who run, particularly the other Faces of Vitality. I’ve loved reading their blogs and benefiting from their experience, so I was delighted when I heard there was an opportunity to be part of Team Vitality again to do the British 10k in London! Since I ran the Reading Half Marathon, I’ve also completed a Tough Mudder race, but my main running achievement has been starting a new job in London and running my commute. I’m hoping it’s helped to maintain my fitness levels, as it hasn’t left much time or inclination for recreational running. The 10k will be the longest distance I’ve run in a while, but I’m really excited about the iconic London route and meeting my fellow Vitality Faces! Rhys Goddard The Vitality Brighton Half Marathon seems like a distance memory now, but not one that I’m likely to forget. Trawling through the event photos the other day, I watched my smile slowly turn to a grimace as the race progressed, and finally the elation that comes after crossing the finish line with the knowledge that you’ve given it everything you’ve got. It was memories like these which made me so happy to find out that I was getting another opportunity to run for Team Vitality at the British 10k in London. The 10k distance is one I am more comfortable with. I have been incorporating some more speed sessions into my weekly routine, whilst still keeping up my weekly long run to maintain speed endurance. Simon Hodkin For the first time in many years I’ve recently had a two-week break from running. The first week I was just busy at work; the second was a week’s holiday in Spain with 35 degree heat. I took my running gear but the lure of the pool was too strong…. So my training has lapsed and I really noticed the effects. However I’m optimistic that the slight drop in fitness will be temporary. Most studies agree with this – after a break due to holiday or injury there’s a short-term, steep drop in performance but it takes a long time to lose most of one’s fitness and it’s quickly regained. I’ve run several half-marathons and a full marathon but a 10k can be one of the hardest races – the best part of an hour at a fast pace. My first-ever 10k I just managed under the hour, while my current PB is 49:04. There’s still some seconds to be shaved off that, but highly unlikely on a crowded course in London. So I’ll just sit back, relax and enjoy the scenery. Sort of… Ian Isaacs Being invited to enter the British London 10k as a ‘Face of Vitality’ is a fantastic opportunity and one which I’m really looking forward to. With a little under one week to go, I can say that my training has been varied but consistent, with lots of hill work and a variety of interval sessions interspersed with my usual longer runs. Having achieved many of my targets over the past few years since beginning running I have set myself a new one; to run a marathon by the end of this year. As for Sunday’s race, I am going into it without any expectations of times. I will however as always be giving it my best shot, but the event will mainly be about soaking up the atmosphere and enjoying the day. I just hope I don’t oversleep and miss the train; I don’t want to be late. Paul Simons Well not too long now until I head down to London for the Vitality British 10k on July 12! But first I had my first ever Spartan Race! A friend at work had suggested I give it a try. Normally I would have said no straight away, it just isn’t my thing. The moment you put obstacles in my way, that require me to use technique, core and upper body strength, I knew I’d make a fool of myself. In the end however, he talked me round so last Saturday I lined up for my first ever Spartan Race in Heaton Park, Manchester. Hopefully this will have set me up nicely for once again being one of the Vitality Faces in the Vitality British 10k.Training has been going well and I aim to run under 36 minutes in London. Good luck to all those competing and also my fellow Vitality Faces. See you there! Get 75% off Champneys Healthy Breaks Relax, unwind and detox at the award-winning Champneys spa resorts. You’ll get 75% off Champneys Spa Days and one, two and three night Spa Stays. Find out more Terms and conditions apply.