The Happy Pear’s no-fry falafels with hummus. These falafel bites are made with fibre-packed chickpeas and cashew nuts. Swap the shop-bought dip for your own colourful hummus, then dig in. Makes 20 Serves 4 Prep time: 20 minutes Cook time: 45 minutes For the falafels: Ingredients: 2 x 400g tins chickpeas ½ fresh green chilli 50g coconut cream concentrate 2 tbsp ground flax seeds 2 tsp ground cumin A small bunch fresh coriander 2 cloves garlic ½ red onion 1 tsp salt ½ tsp black pepper Juice 1 small lemon 50g toasted cashew nuts Method: Preheat the oven to 180ºC/gas mark 4. Drain the chickpeas and rinse thoroughly. Deseed and finely chop the chilli. Finely chop the coconut cream concentrate. In a food processor, blend all the ingredients except the chickpeas until smooth. Add the chickpeas and pulse until blended, but still with small chunks. Roll the mix into little balls or nuggets – you should get about 20. Bake them for 20 minutes, until they go nice and crispy on the outside. Serve with your favourite toppings, or dip into homemade hummus. For the hummus: Ingredients: 3 medium carrots 2½ tsp sea salt 6 tbsp olive oil 1 medium raw beetroot 5 cloves of garlic 3 x 400g tins of chickpeas 150ml lemon juice 6 tbsp light tahini Pinch freshly ground black pepper ½ tsp ground cumin Method: Preheat your oven to 200°C/gas mark 6. Cut your carrots into bite-size pieces and put them at one end of a baking tray. Sprinkle with salt and drizzle with a little of the oil. Remove the dirt from the beetroot and top and tail. Scrub the skin, but don’t peel. Roughly chop into bite-size pieces, then put them at the other end of the same baking tray and similarly sprinkle with salt and drizzle with a little oil. Keep the beetroot and carrot separate, though – you don’t want the colours to merge. Put the baking tray into the preheated oven for 20-30 minutes, or until the veg are well roasted and slightly charred around the edges. Peel the garlic and drain and rinse the chickpeas. Put them in a food processor with the lemon juice, tahini, black pepper and 9 tbsp water. Blend for about 3 minutes, until pretty smooth. This is your main batch of really tasty standard-issue hummus. Taste and season with more salt and pepper if you think it needs it. Divide into 3 equal batches and leave one of the batches aside – this will be your basic hummus. Once the carrots and beetroot are roasted, take them out of the oven. Put the second batch of hummus into the food processor with the roasted carrots and 2 tbsp of olive oil, and blend until smooth. Remove and clean out the food processor. Finally, put the third batch of hummus into the food processor together with the roasted beetroot and 2 tbsp olive oil, and blend until smooth. For more veggie snack inspiration, visit The Happy Pear site . Photo: Alistair Richardson Want more canapé ideas? Try Ruby Tandoh’s carrot and feta bites with lime yogurt .