The 5 best exercises to tone your arms. Many people feel that their bodies need a few tweaks – a couple of pounds shifted here, a little toning there – before they’re ready to bare their skin to the masses. One of the first areas that require attention is often the arms – after all, they’re on display most often when we wear shorter sleeves. How to create lean, toned arms Here are our favourite moves for crafting firm, toned arms – some use your own body weight, while others use simple hand weights or dumb bells. Perform each exercise with weights that feel heavy, but not so much so that you’re unable to complete each set – try 3 to 5-pound (1 to 2-kg) hand weights to start, then progress to 8 to 10-pound (3 to 4-kg) weights and onward as you improve. Start with 2 sets of 8 reps for each exercise, then move up to 3 sets of 10 reps each, then 4 sets of 10 reps, taking at least 30 seconds between each set to recover. Perform the entire routine 2 to 3 times a week, with a day or two off in between to allow the muscles to recover and help prevent injury. Bear in mind that these exercises aren’t intended to bulk up your arms with muscle – you’ll need more intense, specialised workouts if that is your goal. But for those who simply wish to build up basic strength and create a leaner, more defined appearance, these should fit the bill, working the various components of the arms and shoulders evenly to help avoid injury and achieve an overall buffed look. Remember, though, that it isn’t possible to spot-reduce fat from just one body part – you need to combine strength exercises with cardio and a healthy diet in order to burn fat and create visible muscle definition. Curl and press This clever exercise incorporates two classic strength moves to work the biceps (the muscles at the front of the upper arm) and the deltoids (shoulders). Start by standing tall with your feet hip-width apart, arms by your side and abs firm. Rotate your arms so that your palms (holding your weights) are facing forward, then slowly flex your elbows to bring the weights to shoulder height. Next, rotate your wrists so that your palms are facing forward, then push your arms upward to lift the weights above your head – your arms should be fully extended, but without locking the elbow joint. Hold here for a moment, then slowly reverse: bend your arms and bring the weights back to shoulder level, then rotate the palms to face backward and extend the elbows to return the weights to starting position at your sides. You can see a video of the complete movement here . Tricep dip For this exercise you’ll require a firm chair, bench or other low surface that you can sit on. Start by sitting on the edge of the seat with your hands on either side of your hips, fingers pointing forward. Extend your legs forward, keeping your feet flat on the floor, then shift your weight forward until your bottom is off the edge of the seat and your arms are supporting you, with knees at approximately a 90-degree angle. Gradually lower yourself down until your elbows are also at 90 degrees, then straighten your arms to raise yourself back up – this works the triceps, the muscles at the back of your upper arm. For a greater challenge, straighten your legs while performing the movement . Lateral raise This is a good move to work your deltoid muscles and create firm, defined shoulders. Stand with feet hip-width apart and arms at your side, with a weight in either hand and palms facing toward your sides. Keeping your arms extended (but without locking the elbow joint), slowly raise the weights straight out to the side until your arms are at shoulder height. You may not be able to get them this high at first, but be careful not to force it or you could injure yourself – simply raise them as high as you can, then lower to the starting position. Arm circles Arm circles are a great move both to stretch and tone your biceps, triceps and deltoids simultaneously, helping create a long, lean look. Stand with your feet hip-distance apart, and arms extended to either side at shoulder-height, palms facing down. Continue to stand tall with abs firm and shoulders down and back, then slowly begin to move your arms in small circles . Circle your arms in one direction for one set, then reverse and circle in the other direction. Push-ups Probably one of the most familiar of arm exercises, this classic bodyweight exercise is particularly good for strengthening the pectoral (chest) muscles and triceps. Start on all fours with your hands directly beneath your shoulders, then step your feet back until your legs are fully extended. Proper alignment is key, so make sure your entire body is parallel to the floor – don’t allow your bottom to poke up or your back to arch, and keep your neck in line with the rest of your spine. Firm your abs and roll your shoulders down and back. To execute the push-up , bend your arms and gradually lower yourself down to within an inch or so from the floor, then push back up, maintaining your alignment throughout. The great thing about push-ups is that there are many variations to alter the difficulty of the move – try a few versions to keep your workout fresh. Join Virgin Active Get discounted gym membership at Virgin Active with Vitality*. A joining fee will apply. Find out more *Selected Vitality products only. Minimum monthly premiums and terms and conditions apply.