The Big Sunday Cook Up – Step By Step. Our easy-to-follow guide will walk you through your Sunday cooking session, which should take around two hours, give or take. Don’t stress too much about timings. It’s just a question of keeping an eye on things, and trusting your judgement. Step 1 Start with roasting the aubergines. Preheat the oven to 200°C, fan 180°C, gas 6. Cut 3 aubergines in half lengthways, then cut each half into 4 lengths. Divide between 2 baking trays and drizzle over 3 tbsp olive oil and 1 tsp cumin seeds. Season, then toss to combine and put in the oven to roast (they’ll take around 25 minutes in the oven). Step 2 Once they’re in the oven, turn your focus to the winter mash. Peel 1.25kg potatoes and cut into 4cm chunks; peel 750g of mixed swede and parsnip, and cut into 2.5cm chunks. Put the veg into a very large pan, cover with cold water and bring to a simmer. Cook until tender – this will take around 20 minutes. Step 3 When the veg is simmering, check the aubergines – you’re looking for the flesh to be tender and the edge of the skin to be starting to crisp up. If they look ready, take them out and set them aside to cool. If not, leave for a few more minutes. Step 4 While your winter veg is still simmering away, make a start on the tomato sauce. Heat 3 tbsp olive oil in a large, deep pan over a medium heat. Finely chop 3 medium onions and add to pan, then sauté over a low heat for 5-6 minutes. While they’re softening, check the aubergines if they’re still in the oven – they should be ready now, so take them out and set aside to cool. Once cooled completely, transfer to an airtight container and put into the fridge. Step 5 Turn your attention back to the onions; give them a stir. Finely chop 6 large garlic cloves, add these to the onion in the pan and cook, stirring, for a few minutes. Stir in 200g tomato purée and 6 x 400g tins chopped tomatoes, then season with salt and give it all a good stir. Cook, uncovered, over a medium heat, until you have a thick, rich sauce – this will take around 30-40 minutes. Step 6 While your tomato sauce is simmering away, check your vegetables for the winter mash – they should be ready. You want them to be tender to the touch. Once they are, drain them, and mash with 150ml semi-skimmed milk. Season, then set aside. Step 7 Turn your attention back to the tomato sauce. It should be starting to thicken at this point, but will need a little longer to reach the right consistency. From now on, stir it occasionally to prevent it catching on the pan. Step 8 While the sauce continues to simmer, prepare your koftas. First, finely chop 2 shallots and ¼ red onion, then put into a bowl with 400g lamb mince. Crush 3 garlic cloves and grate a 2cm piece of fresh ginger, then add both to the bowl along with 1 tsp ground cumin, ½ tsp chilli flakes and 1 tbsp chopped fresh mint. Grate over the zest of 1 lemon, then mix it together. Shape the mince into 4 long koftas, then thread onto 4 skewers. Transfer to an airtight container and put into the fridge. Step 9 Give your tomato sauce another stir, then it’s time to make the shepherd’s pie filling. Heat ½ tbsp of olive oil in a large frying pan, then fry 400g lamb mince over a high heat until it starts to brown. Don’t be tempted to stir the mince too much – leaving it to develop a little colour now means more flavour later. Remove the lamb from the pan, set aside, then remove the pan from the heat. Step 10 Check your tomato sauce again. If it has thickened up (and tastes delicious!) remove the pan from the heat, and set aside to cool. Step 11 Now, back to your shepherd’s pie. Finely chop ¾ red onion, 2 celery sticks and 2 carrots. Heat 1 tbsp olive oil in the same frying pan used to brown the mince, then add the chopped veg along with 1 tsp dried oregano. Cook over a medium heat for 4-5 minutes until the veg is softened. Return the mince to the pan and add 1 /3 of your tomato sauce. Stir, then reduce the heat and simmer for 10 minutes, or until thickened. Step 12 Tip the mixture into 2-litre baking dish and spread ½ of the winter mash over the top. Roughen the surface with a fork and dot over some cherry tomatoes. Set the pie aside to cool completely. Step 13 Finally, make the houmous. Drain and rinse a 400g tin chickpeas then blitz in a food processor with 3 tbsp tahini, 30g fresh flat-leaf parsley, 2 crushed garlic cloves and the zest and juice of 1 lemon. With the motor still running, add water until a smooth paste forms. Season to taste then scrape into a bowl, cover with a reusable stretch lid and pop in the fridge. Step 14 Your work is nearly done! The koftas and houmous for Monday, and the aubergines for Tuesday are already in the fridge. When everything else has cooled, spoon the remaining mash into an airtight container and put in the fridge for Wednesday , and divide the remaining tomato sauce into 2 equal portions, then store in airtight containers in the fridge until needed on Wednesday and Thursday. Wrap the shepherd’s pie in clingfilm and freeze until Thursday night, when you’ll remove from the freezer and allow to defrost overnight in the fridge head of reheating on Friday . Want to see the final meals that you’ll be serving throughout the week? Have a look! And in case you missed it, here’s the shopping list you need – from store cupboard staples to kitchen equipment.