The Health Benefit of Spices. Adding spice to a dish is a great way of adding flavor to every meal. In fact, finding the right combination will not only enhance a meal but it could also have lasting health benefits too. Spice up your dish with tips from Kelly McCabe , Registered Dietitian at Eat and Think on eight of the best spices and how you can use them. As well as making our food more flavoursome, many spices contain compounds that have beneficial effects on our health – some can even be used as a natural remedy for common ailments, such as indigestion or colds. Using culinary herbs, spices and herbal teas are a safe, convenient and delicious way of incorporating the benefits of spices into our daily lives. Ginger Ginger has been used as an anti-sickness remedy for hundreds of years as it contains volatile oils, such as gingerol, that are believed to stimulate saliva and gastric function. Add to hot water to help relieve symptoms of colds or to a dish at lunch or in the evening to relieve indigestion. Coriander seeds The flavour of coriander seeds comes from the volatile oils and fatty acids they contain. Together these oils and fatty acids are responsible for the digestive and anti-flatulent properties of the seeds. When making Indian dishes that use pulses try adding crushed coriander seeds to reduce the bloating normally associated with eating beans and legumes. Fennel seeds Like many of its fellow spices, fennel contains a unique combination of phytonutrients – plant compounds that have beneficial effects working with other essential nutrients to promote good health – including flavonoids, such as those found in dark chocolate, which make it a potent antioxidant. Fennel also contains an anti-inflammatory volatile oil, anethole. Cardamom Cardamom can be used for relief of indigestion and heartburn. It is believed that the small green and black pods contain chemicals that appear to increase the movement of food through the intestine and also reduce unwanted gas production. Cinnamon There is some debate over whether cinnamon can help to control blood glucose levels and, therefore, be good for people with diabetes. Several small studies have linked cinnamon to better blood sugar levels – for example, in one small study where volunteers added between 1 to 6 grams of cinnamon to their diet for 40 days, it was found that cinnamon cut cholesterol by about 18 per cent and blood sugar levels by 24 per cent. The same effects have not been seen in other studies though, so the jury is still out. But there would certainly be no harm in people adding cinnamon to their breakfast cereal each morning until more is known about cinnamon’s health benefits. Why not try our recipe for Apple, Cinnamon, Chia and Oat Porridge with Pumpkin Seeds? Click here! Garlic Garlic contains sulphur compounds that are found to help lower blood pressure – in particular allicin, which promotes antioxidant activity and has antibacterial and antiviral functions. Cayenne Chilli or cayenne peppers contain capsaicin – a plant chemical that has been found to reduce pain when applied locally. They also contain vitamin A and carotenoids, which, as well as giving the plants their red, yellow and orange colours, have antioxidant properties too. Turmeric A mild, fragrant spice from the ginger family, turmeric’s active ingredient is curcumin, which has been found to have anti-inflammatory properties and is a powerful antioxidant. Black pepper and olive oil enhance the absorption of turmeric so try adding it to cooked savoury dishes with a little oil and plenty of black pepper.