Total body workouts – get fit fast. Everyone likes the idea of getting the most out of their workout in a minimal amount of time, which is why a total body workout has considerable appeal. Most of us are keen to look our best but often have limited time (and sometimes patience) to work one body part per session, so a series of exercises that helps hone our entire bodies in one go can prove to be really useful. Read on to find out if a total body workout could be the most effective workout yet. Of course, a total body workout can mean different things to different people, and specifically what it involves depends on your personal fitness goals. For those keen on building muscle, a total body workout involves doing exercises for all of the different muscle groups within a single session, rather than devoting one session to working the legs, another to the arms, and so on. Or, it could mean performing moves that are designed to work multiple muscle groups simultaneously, as is the case in many routines that focus on functional fitness. For others, a total body workout involves elements of strength training, cardio and stretching, all within a single session. Either way, there are many advantages to covering your entire body in a single workout, from speed and convenience, to allowing for more variety in your workouts and increasing calorie burn. By working your whole body intensively several days a week, and keeping the other days as rest days or for light activity only, you can also increase your recovery time and reduce your risk of injury from overtraining. Many exercise classes offered by our Vitality partner Virgin Active provide these various types of total body workout, so why not take advantage of your Vitality member discount to try out whichever takes your fancy? For inspiration, here are a few examples of total body workouts that will help you hone your entire body: Power Yoga Power yoga – sometimes called “gym yoga” – is based on the Ashtanga system of yoga , which involves moving through a series of poses synchronised with the breath. These are designed to build strength and flexibility in the entire body while simultaneously calming and centring the mind, resulting in a thorough mind-body workout. Power yoga focuses more on the physical aspect of the poses than the spiritual, and tends to differ slightly from class to class rather than sticking to the established order of Ashtanga poses. However, it will help you burn more calories than standard yoga and even provides a light cardio workout, making it an ideal way to stretch, tone and boost your overall fitness. Kettlebells These rather-imposing bits of gym kit look like bowling balls with handles, but they’re actually one of the most effective pieces of equipment for building strength, burning calories and improving your balance and coordination. Working out with kettlebells is excellent for increasing your endurance and core strength, and because the exercises are designed to activate several muscle groups at once, you’ll quickly find your overall fitness improving. Kettlebells are surprisingly easy to use once you get the hang of them, but be sure to have a qualified instructor teach you proper form first so as to avoid injury. Body Attack Offered in Virgin Active gyms across the UK, Body Attack combines traditional, high-octane aerobics with intensive upper and lower body toning moves to help burn fat and build lean muscle, all within a single, exciting class. With an energetic playlist and plenty of encouragement from a qualified instructor, this is a brilliant way to boost your stamina, strength and cardiovascular fitness in under an hour – plus the routine changes every couple of months, to make sure your body is always being challenged (and you never get bored). HIIT – High Intensity Interval Training High intensity interval training – or HIIT – has been a major buzzword on the fitness scene for some time now, as this fast, ultra-challenging form of circuit training really does deliver results. Usually combining a series of strength and cardio exercises performed in short, sharp bursts of activity, punctuated by periods of lighter activity or rest, HIIT circuit training allows you to work your body to the max in a relatively compressed period of time. Its sheer intensity delivers an outstanding cardio workout and can significantly boost your metabolism, meaning you’ll burn calories at a higher rate for up to a full day after your workout – all while building muscle and improving your agility and endurance. You can try HIIT-style classes at your local Virgin Active gym, where a qualified instructor can check your form to ensure you get all the benefits without risking injury. Aqua Aerobics This is a great total body workout for anyone suffering from pain or injury, or who simply wants a low-impact cardio workout with additional muscle-toning benefits. You’ll burn plenty of calories and work your heart and lungs, plus the water resistance forces your muscles to work as much as 12 times harder than they would on dry land. This is due to a phenomenon called double concentric muscle action , which essentially means that your muscles are encountering pressure on all sides: on forward or outward movements, and then again on the way back. Even better, the natural buoyancy in water means that you’ll be putting minimal pressure on your ligaments and joints, minimising the risk of injury or strain.