Two ex-smokers share their experience on giving up for good. Published: 21 October 2021. Written in collaboration with Allen Carr. This Stoptober we’ve been exploring the connection between mindset and addiction. How can we train our minds to think differently about the long-term habits we’ve created over time, that are designed to be so additive? Our partner Allen Carr’s Easyway programme helps smokers to understand why they smoke, and what keeps them hooked. In doing this, the programme allows smokers to shift their smoking mindset and give up for good. Learn more about Mark (M) and Laura (L), who are now both happily smoke-free thanks to the Easyway programme as they share their quitting stories with us. From craving struggles to withdrawal pangs, discover the significant changes they’ve experienced since saying no to smoking. How old were you when you started smoking? M: About 18. L: I didn’t start smoking until I was 18 years old. Why did you start smoking? M: I thought it was “rebellious “and to keep up with the “cool” boys. L: I’d had a puff on a cigarette at various times when I was drunk as a teenager, however I started to smoke every day when I went on holiday to Turkey with my best friend who smoked continually, so I joined in. How long did you smoke for and how many a day? M: 35 years and varied between 10-20. Occasionally more at a party. L: I smoked for around 10 years and it varied from 10 a day to 60 if I went out clubbing. What benefits did you believe you got from smoking? M: I knew I wasn’t getting any benefit, but I was fatalistic about it. L: I never really believed there was a benefit to smoking, I just knew I was irritated without them. What made you decide to quit smoking with Allen Carr’s seminar? M: I was in my mid 50’s and was waking up in the night with wheezy lungs. I’d seen his book and made the decision to try to quit. I figured the group experience would be a good way to do it. L: I’d tried to quit with willpower and nicotine patches and failed…then a friend of mine came on a night out with me and I couldn’t believe that she’d stopped smoking and didn’t even crave a cigarette with a glass of wine thanks to attending an Allen Carr Stop Smoking Seminar. – Post Seminar – Was it easy to quit? M: Yes, once I understood the true reason why I smoked, and that it wasn’t because of my personality or character or anything, I could see through the whole illusionary nature of smoking nicotine. It was liberating. L: It was the easiest thing in the world. Did you need willpower? M: No, just understanding. L: No because there are no benefits to smoking a cigarette Did you struggle with cravings? M: Sometimes I may catch a whiff of a just lit cigarette and think hmm that’s nice but  I now see that smell and taste, although related, are totally different in reality. Similarly, fresh ground coffee doesn’t taste like it smells. A freshly opened tin of paint smells lovely! But I’m not going to eat it. L: None whatsoever. Did you avoid places where you would normally have smoked? M: Not at all. L: Never, I enjoyed going out to pubs even more because I could concentrate on dancing and not feeding my nicotine addiction Did you use any substitutes? M: No. L: No. Do you miss cigarettes? M: No. L: No. Did you suffer horrible withdrawal pangs? M: No. L: No. Do you think you will ever smoke again? M: Definitely not! L: Never, because there are no benefits to smoking. What do you think shifted your mindset about smoking? M: Understanding why I smoked clearly which is explained on the course. L: I always knew it was a pointless thing to do but once I’d started smoking, I felt uneasy without them and therefore felt slightly better when I smoked one. Have there been any significant changes to/in your life since you quit? M: My lungs cleared within a few weeks. However bad a day I have I can always say to myself, “Yes, but at least you’re not smoking anymore!” L: I have more time because I’m not constantly trying to find 10 minutes for a cigarette break. I visit the gym more often; I have more spare money and of course I smell much better! What would you say to someone who was unsure about attending an Allen Carr seminar? M: You have nothing to lose, and so much to gain. You will regard it as one of your best achievements. You will have escaped from addiction, and he do much more relaxed about everything, and not have nicotine wasting so much of your precious time every day. L: I would say don’t waste another minute of your life on cigarettes. Time is our most precious non-renewable resource, and every minute smoking is an absolute waste. Allen Carr’s seminar changed my life for the better and I’m eternally grateful. Discover more methods to give up smoking and what your options are. As a Vitality member, you could save up to £299 on the Allen Carr Stop Smoking Programme. Available with qualifying health insurance , life insurance and investment plans. Log in to Member Zone for the details.