Vitality Women’s FA Cup Final Social Media Ticket Giveaway Terms and Conditions 2021. For the purposes of this prize draw: a) Draw Date means 05 November 2021. b) Draw Period means 25 October 2021 – 04 November 2021 in which Eligible Participants may enter into the prize draw (entries received after this time will not be counted, valid, accepted or considered). c) Eligible Participant means any individual aged 18 years or over and resident in the United Kingdom, who submits their details via either the competition post on the Vitality UK Facebook page or Vitality UK Instagram page during the Draw Period. Staff of the Promoter, Essentially and any third parties or agencies connected with or involved in the administration of the prize draw will be excluded from winning the prize draw. d) Prize means two tickets to the Vitality Women’s FA Cup Final at Wembley Stadium on 05 December 2021. Ten pairs of tickets (twenty individual tickets given away as pairs) will be available to win in total. Five pairs on Facebook and five pairs on Instagram. e) Promoter means Vitality Corporate Services Limited (company number 05933141) of 3 More London Riverside, London SE1 2AQ trading as VitalityHealth, VitalityLife and VitalityInvest. The prize draw is open to all Eligible Participants who comply with these terms and conditions and only one entry per Eligible Participant is permitted. The Promoter reserves the right to refuse to award the Prize to anyone in breach of these terms and conditions. The prize draw is free to enter and no purchase is necessary. Entries will be entered into a prize draw and the winner(s) will be drawn at random by the Promoter (supervised by an independent person) on the Draw Date. The Promoter accepts no responsibility for entries lost, stolen or unsuccessfully completed due to a technical fault, technical malfunction, computer hardware or software failure, satellite, network or server failure of any kind. The winner(s) will be contacted by direct message on either Facebook or Instagram using the account used to enter the giveaway up to three (3) times after the Draw Date. In the event that we fail to obtain confirmation from the winner(s), or the winner(s) refuses the Prize or for whatever reason cannot accept the Prize, the original winner(s) will forfeit the Prize immediately, and an alternative winner(s) will be drawn and notified in accordance with these Terms & Conditions. When entering the prize draw, you acknowledge that your name, address, e-mail address, telephone number and date of birth (“ Personal Data” ) will have been made available to the Promoter, The Football Association Limited and for administrative purposes. All Personal Data of the winner(s) will be held and used for the purposes of the prize draw by the Promoter and The Football Association Limited in accordance with the Promoter’s and The Football Association Limited privacy policies (which can be found on their websites or if not, requested) and the Data Protection Act 2018. The decision of the Promoter regarding any aspect of the prize draw is final and binding and no correspondence will be entered into about it. Other than as set out in clause 10, the Prize is not transferable, non-exchangeable and cannot be redeemed for cash. The Promoter reserves the right to substitute the Prize with another prize of similar value in the event the Prize is unavailable due to circumstances beyond the Promoter’s reasonable control. The Promoter reserves the right to void, cancel, suspend, or amend the Prize where it becomes necessary to do so including in the event of fraudulent behaviour. Insofar as is permitted by law, the Promoter, its agents, or distributors will not in any circumstances be responsible or liable to compensate the winner(s) or accept any liability for any loss, damage, personal injury or death occurring as a result of taking up the Prize except where it is caused by the negligence of the Promoter, its agents or distributors or that of their employees. The statutory rights of Eligible Participants are not affected. The prize draw will be governed by English law and Eligible Participants submit to the jurisdiction of the English courts. The name and county of the prize draw winner(s) will be made available on request by writing to the Marketing department, Vitality Corporate Services Limited, 4 th Floor, 70 Gracechurch Street, London, EC3V 0XL.