Vitality Big Half Entry Social Media Competition Terms And Conditions. The prize draw is open to all Eligible Participants who comply with these terms and conditions and only one entry per Eligible Participant is permitted. The Promoter reserves the right to refuse to award the Prize to anyone in breach of these terms and conditions. For the purposes of this prize draw: a) Prize Draw Period means from 12pm Friday 22nd January 2021 to 10pm on Wednesday 27th January 2021, during which time the Eligible Participants may enter into the prize draw. Entries received after this time will not be counted, valid, accepted or considered; b) Draw Date means Thursday 28th January 2021; c) Eligible Participant means any individual aged 18 years or over and resident in the United Kingdom, who complies with these terms and conditions. All members of staff of the Promoter and their families and any third parties or agencies connected with or involved in the administration of the prize draw will be excluded from winning the prize draw. Eligible Participants can enter the prize draw in one of three ways (A, B and C) outlined below: A: Eligible Participant goes to the Vitality UK Instagram Page Instagram.com/vitality_uk, likes the post, follows vitality_uk page and comments saying why they want to run the Vitality Big Half. B: Eligible Participant goes to the Vitality UK Facebook Page facebook.com/VitalityUK, likes the post, likes Vitality UK page and comments saying why they want to run the Vitality Big Half. C: Eligible Participant goes to the Vitality UK Twitter Page twitter.com/Vitality_UK, likes the post, follows Vitality_UK page and comments saying why they want to run the Vitality Big Half. d) Prize means: One place in the Vitality Big Half: https://www.thebighalf.co.uk/events/vitality-big-half/index.html e) Promoter means Vitality Corporate Services Limited (company number 05933141) of 3 More London Riverside, London SE1 2AQ trading as VitalityHealth, VitalityLife and VitalityInvest. 3. The prize draw is free to enter and no purchase is necessary. 4. Entries will be entered into a prize draw and the winner will be drawn at random by the Promoter (supervised by an independent person) on the Draw Date. 5. The Promoter accepts no responsibility for entries lost, stolen or unsuccessfully completed due to a technical fault, technical malfunction, computer hardware or software failure, satellite, network or server failure of any kind. 6. The 50 (fifty) winners will be contacted within 48 hours of being selected via Instagram direct message, Facebook messenger or Twitter direct message. In the event that we fail to obtain confirmation from the winners, or the winners refuse the Prize or for whatever reason cannot accept the Prize, the original winner will forfeit the Prize immediately, and an alternative winner will be drawn and notified in accordance with these Terms & Conditions. 7. The decision of the Promoter regarding any aspect of the prize draw is final and binding and no correspondence will be entered into about it. 8. Other than as set out in clause 9, the Prize is not transferable, non-exchangeable and cannot be redeemed for cash. 9. The Promoter reserves the right to substitute the Prize with another prize of similar value in the event the Prize is unavailable due to circumstances beyond the Promoter’s reasonable control. 10. The Promoter reserves the right to void, cancel, suspend, or amend the Prize where it becomes necessary to do so including in the event of fraudulent behaviour. 11, Insofar as is permitted by law, the Promoter, its agents or distributors will not in any circumstances be responsible or liable to compensate the winner or accept any liability for any loss, damage, personal injury or death occurring as a result of taking up the Prize except where it is caused by the negligence of the Promoter, its agents or distributors or that of their employees. The statutory rights of Eligible Participants are not affected. 12. The prize draw will be governed by English law and Eligible Participants submit to the jurisdiction of the English courts. 13. The name and county of the prize draw winner will be made available on request by writing to the Marketing department, Vitality Corporate Services Limited, 4 th Floor, 70 Gracechurch Street, London, EC3V 0XL.