Vitality’s Happy Half Term: Keeping Your Family Healthy & Having Fun. We know how hard life in lockdown can be, let alone during half term. But we’re here to help with our #VitalityHalfTerm programme of events, keeping you happy and healthy in body and mind. This half term, we’re bringing together our Vitality Ambassadors and our Vitality Performance Champions – along with some special guests – to provide you with some activities to boost your energy, and your spirits, on our Half-Term YouTube channel ! From 8-21 February, join our star-studded Ambassador line-up – including Dame Jessica Ennis-Hill, Ellie Simmonds OBE and more. There’ll be daily fun, fitness, food and tips on how to stress less, that the whole family can get involved in. You can check out all of our sessions every day on our YouTube page – and check out the calendar of events below. Exciting #VitalityHalfTerm events every day on YouTube! You heard us right – a new video from us every day for two weeks over on our Half Term YouTube page . Vitality will be bringing you workouts with Dame Jessica Ennis-Hill, live cook-along sessions, dance parties for the kids & much much more… making half term fun for the whole family. — What’s coming up: Calendar of events Monday 8 – Sunday 21 February Check out the ingredients you’ll need for the pizza cookalong on 13 February here! — Join in the fun and win some amazing prizes Prize draw running on Instagram and Facebook When you enter our prize draw on our social channels you could be in the chance to win prizes from some of our partners including Apple Watch, Waitrose, Rakuten and Amazon! How to enter? Instagram: Head over to vitality_uk on Instagram , take a picture from or after taking part in one of the events, hashtag #VitalityHalfTerm and tag @vitality_uk and we’ll randomly select a winner. Full T&Cs apply. Facebook: Head over to Vitality UK on Facebook , leave a comment on our pinned prize draw post with a picture from or after taking part in one of the events and tag #VitalityHalfTerm. T&Cs apply. Prize draw for Vitality Members only Are you a Vitality member? We have a very exclusive prize draw running throughout the two week period, with prizes from Apple Watch and Garmin. How to enter? If you get active between now and 21 February 2021, we’ll enter you into our prize draw to win one of 80 prizes. These include: Apple Watches (10 to win) Garmin trackers (10 to win) 20 x £30 Amazon vouchers 20 x £30 Waitrose vouchers 20 x £30 Rakuten vouchers To be eligible for our prize draw you need to: Make sure you’re registered on Member Zone and you’ve completed your online health review Earn 12 activity points over the next two weeks and sync your activity to Vitality by 21 February 2021. If you forget to sync your device, your activity won’t be counted What’s more, we’ll boost your number of entries to the prize draw the higher your Vitality status. So if you improve your health over the two week period you could increase your chances of winning. See how many entries you could get! Terms and conditions apply. — Inspiration for the whole family We’ve also got a whole host of blog content to give you fitness, health and nutrition inspiration, as well as even more ideas for how to get active and have some fun with your kids. You can find more inspiration in our Half Term Hub ! Lockdown Printable Checklist To Keep You Healthy (and Sane! ) || Kids’ Half-Term Activity Checklist – Fun Ideas for the Family Hungry? Here are some quick family snacks || Get your kids meditating before bedtime || Need to relax? Create some me-time at home ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————-