Vitality At Home Series: Week 1 Recap. Published: 3 April 2020 Welcome to week 1 of the Vitality At Home series. We’re living through extraordinary times and it’s a big adjustment for us all. So, each week, with the help of our Ambassadors and partners, we’ll share recipes, workouts and other handy tips to keep you happy and healthy while we stay at home. Get moving and cooking with our week 1 recap… Day 2: Simple Salmon & Noodles England cricketer Jos Buttler shows us the secret to his delicious salmon and noodles dish. Prep time: 10 minutes Cook time: 10 minutes Total time: 20 minutes Serves: 2 Ingredients Salmon fillets Broccoli Asparagus Rice noodles Method Place the salmon fillets and vegetables in a colander and cover with foil Add boiling water to a pan, place the colander on top and leave to steam for 10 minutes Make your sauce by mixing a good glug of olive oil, soy sauce, minced garlic, chopped ginger and chilli, finishing off with a squeeze of lemon Stir fry the noodles according to packet instructions Assemble your plate: noodles first, topped with the salmon, asparagus and broccoli, finishing by drizzling on your sauce Day 4: How To 25-Minute Circuit Get your sweat on with heptathlete and gold medallist Jessica Ennis-Hill in this quick 25-minute full body circuit This is a body weight circuit so all you need is yourself! The workout is structured into five rounds of five different exercises You’ll do each exercise for 30 seconds, then rest for 30 seconds, before moving onto the next exercise Once you’ve completed each exercise once you’ve completed one round Take a minutes rest and start the next round Repeat for five times in total to complete the whole circuit The exercises: Plank half circle Jumping lunge Single leg spring Press up Scissors Day 5: Egg Cupcakes Former Vitality Roses coach, new mum and Vitality Ambassador Tracey Neville shares this quick and healthy egg cupcake recipe with us. Prep time: 5 minutes Cook time: 20 minutes Total time: 25 minutes Makes 6 cupcakes Ingredients 6 x eggs Choice of chopped vegetables (Tracey likes broccoli, peppers and onion) Handful of grated cheese for flavouring Milk Olive oil Salt and pepper Method Prep any filling you want to include in your egg cupcakes – you can use bell peppers, onions, chopped broccoli or even cheese and ham Prep your muffin tin by rubbing a dash of oil around the tin Crack your eggs into a jug and whisk together; add a splash of milk and season to taste Spoon your veggie mix into the muffin tin Pour your egg mixture on top of your veggies Pop in the oven for 20 minutes on 180C/350F Day 7: Easy At-Home Workout Jos Buttler’s back again but this time, with a workout you can easily do from home. Give it a go! The workout is structured into five rounds of five different exercises Complete each exercise once – that’s one round Take a minute’s rest and then repeat four times more The exercises: 10 x squats 10 x press ups 30 – 60 seconds planks 12 x lunges on each leg 15 x glute bridges Let us know how you get with these wonderful workouts and tasty recipes by tagging us on Instagram @vitality_uk and using #StayHealthyAtHome. For more from where that came from, join us again next week. Check out more from our Vitality At Home series.