Vitality At Home Series: Week 4 Recap. Published: 24 April 2020 Week 4 of our Vitality at Home series. This week, our ambassadors and champs share three tasty recipes for you to try, as well as a whole host of book, TV show, film and podcast recommendations to help you switch off and chill in the evenings. Check them out… Day 22: Breakfast Smoothie Vitality Performance Champ and former Rugby 7’s player James Rodwell shared this quick and delicious smoothie recipe – perfect for breakfast on the go. Prep time: 3 minutes Cook time: 2 minutes Total time: 5 minutes Serves: 1 Ingredients 1 x banana 1 x cup of oats Handful of blueberries Handful of frozen berries 1 x tbsp peanut butter Handful of spinach Glass of water Method Simply pop all your ingredients into the blender and pulse until smooth. Pour into a glass and enjoy. The perfect way to start your morning. Day 25: Thai Red Curry Prep time : 5 minutes Cook time : 20 minutes Total time: 25 minutes Ingredients 1 x white onion 2 x peppers – red and yellow Carton of mushrooms 2 x jarred roasted red peppers 2 x tablespoon tomato puree 1 red chilli pepper 1 green chilli pepper 2 x sticks of lemongrass 3cm piece of ginger 2 x garlic cloves Large handful of fresh coriander 4 x lime leaves Soy sauce Sesame oil Fish sauce Olive oil 1 x tin of light coconut milk Method Heat oil in a frying pan and cook mushrooms for 5 minutes Add peppers and onions. Cook on a mid to high heat for 5-10minutes until vegetables are softened. Separately, blend together roasted peppers, tomato puree, lemongrass, chilli peppers, ginger, garlic, coriander, lime leaves, soy sauce, sesame oil, fish sauce and olive oil. This creates the paste for the curry. Add paste to the pan with vegetables and stir in until covered. Cook for another 5-10 minutes on a low to medium heat. Add coconut milk and stir thoroughly. Get creative and add some green vegetables like sugar snap peas or mange tout, you can add some protein like chicken, prawns or tofu. Sprinkle some fresh coriander on top and it’s good to go! Day 27: Veggie Couscous England and Saracens rugby player Maro Itoje breaks down his veggie cousous dish. Prep time: 10 mins Cook time: 20 mins Total time: 30 mins Ingredients Couscous 3 x spring onions 3 x onions 1 x yellow pepper 3 x carrots A Scotch bonnet 1 x garlic clove Chilli olive oil Olive oil Soy sauce Garlic pepper Dried mixed herbs Pepper Stock cube Method Chop all vegetables and place in a deep frying pan Add olive oil and begin to cook through Crumble the stock cube to bring out the flavours of the vegetables Add chilli olive oil, soy sauce, garlic pepper, mixed herbs and pepper – season to your personal taste Put couscous in a bowl and add boiling water. Make sure the water level is approximately 2ml above couscous Once couscous has absorbed water, add to the vegetables Leave on low heat and keep stirring to combine Serve and enjoy Day 28: How to switch off in the evening Want something new to watch, listen to or read? Here are our champs and ambassador’s top recommendations. Enjoy! Films Rocket Man – Ellie Simmonds The Matrix – Johnny Wilkinson Shawshank Redemption – Tracey Neville TV Shows The Sopranos – Seb Coe Peaky Blinders – Ellie Simmonds Please Like Me – Heather Knight Books Julia Donaldson books – Jessica Ennis-Hill The Handmaid’s Tale – Heather Knight Brit(ish) – Maro Itoje Everything I Know About Love – Fran Williams This Is Going To Hurt – Ellie Simmonds Podcasts Happy Mum, Happy Baby – Jodie Gibson Don’t Tell Me The Score – Gabby Marshall Want more? Check out what happened in weeks 2 and 3 and see what else is in our Vitality At Home series. Follow the full series over on our Instagram: @vitality_uk .