Vitality At Home Series: Week 5 Recap. Published: 1 May 2020 We’re into week 5 of our Vitality At Home series! This week, it’s all about eating well and moving well with our Vitality Ambassadors. Day 30: Greek Salad In our ‘Eat like an Olympian’ series, we challenged Seb Coe to make a starter for you to try. Here’s his Greek Salad (with a little help from daughter Alice) Ingredients 1 x cucumber Handful of cherry tomatoes 1 x red onion Handful of peppers 1 x red pepper Oregano 1 x block of feta cheese Extra virgin olive oil Balsamic vinegar Instructions 1. Wash your hands and your ingredients to start with 2. Chop your cucumber into chunky quarters 3. Cut the cherry tomatoes into halves 4. Chop the red pepper into chunky squares 5. Slice onions and break up directly into salad 6. Slice olives, ensuring you remove the stone 7. Break the feta cheese block into salad 8. Add about 2 tsp of oregano 9. Drizzle with olive oil & balsamic vinegar to taste 10. Serve and enjoy as a starter or accompaniment to a main dish Day 31: Creamy Broccoli Gnocchi In day 2 of ‘Eat like an Olympian’, Seb Coe challenged Ellie Simmonds to make a delicious main. Creamy broccoli gnocchi was her dish of choice. Try it out: Ingredients 100g gnocchi (per person) Long stem broccoli Peas Spinach Crème fraiche Garlic oil or clove Mustard 1 x lemon (for juice & zest) Salt Pepper Instructions 1. Chop each of your long stem broccoli three pieces 2. Put crème fraiche, garlic oil or clove, mustard, 1/2 lemon juice and 1/2 lemon zest into a bowl with a little salt & pepper for your sauce. 3. Place your broccoli in boiling water for 3 minutes 4. Add gnocchi to boiling water with broccoli and cook until it rises to the top 5. Add broccoli, gnocchi and peas to a frying pan and cook for a couple of minutes 6. Add spinach and cook until wilted 7. Add sauce and cook through 8. Serve your gnocchi dish! Day 32: Indulgent Brownies To finish off, Ellie challenged Jessica Ennis-Hill to come up with a tasty dessert and these indulgent chocolate brownies definitely fit the bill! Ingredients 185g unsalted butter 185g dark chocolate 50g white chocolate 50g milk chocolate 275g caster sugar 3 large eggs 40g cocoa powder 85g plain flour (you can substitute for any kind of flour – coconut, almond, spelt etc) Instructions Melt your butter and dark chocolate together and set aside Chop your milk chocolate and white chocolate into squares for later Add sugar and eggs to a bowl and whisk (electric preferable but hand constitutes as a mini workout) until creamy Sieve the cocoa powder and flour into the mixture and fold together Add in your chopped up chocolate pieces and mix Line a 20cm deep baking tray with baking paper Cook in the oven on 180 degrees for 25 minutes Remove from oven and let cool. Cut into squares and voila! Enjoy Day 34: HIIT Cardio Workout In the spirit of keeping active, England cricketer Heather Knight put us through our paces with this high-energy HIIT routine. There are five exercises. Do each for 40 seconds and then have 20 seconds rest: Wide squat to narrow squat Breakdancer press-up Tuck jump Press up into plank into mountain climber Jumping lunge Follow along with Heather… Day 36: Stretch Routine We finished off with a relaxing pilates-inspired stretch with Jos Buttler and his wife Louise. If you enjoyed this, check out what happened in week 3 and 4 . For more tips and ideas on how to stay active and healthy at home, have a look at our Vitality At Home hub. Stay tuned into our Instagram @vitality_uk for the latest.