Vitality 7-Day Weight Loss Recipe Challenge. Champneys Senior Nutritionist Becki Douglas has developed a one-week weight loss eating challenge that is not only healthy and will leave you feeling revitalised, but is also easy to stick to all year round. So if you’re reading this in the new year as part of your resolution, or just fancy shedding some pounds anytime, stick to these 21 recipes or choose the ones you enjoy and give our 7-day challenge a go! Day One Start the day with a cocoa-nut protein smoothie and end with cod and prawn fish cakes with a sumptuous avocado aioli. Oh, and for lunch, delve into a mango chicken jam jar salad. Who said dieting had to be dull?! Click here for Day 1 recipes and instructions. Day Two A boiled egg with smoked salmon and asparagus soldiers for breakfast? A mediterranean tuna rice bowl for lunch? And a cauliflower crust pizza for dinner? Put down that diet book and pick up day two of our 7-day weight loss plan! Click here for Day 2 recipes and instructions. Day Three Try Becki’s delicious grainless granola. Follow that with a Thai curry soup for lunch and a chorizo tortilla for tea and you’ve gone and completed day 3. Click here for Day 3 recipes and instructions. Day Four You’re halfway there. Treat yourself to a ham and egg cup, roasted vegetable and lentil salad and a spicy ragu with courgette fettuccini. And the great thing about it is that this “cheat” day doesn’t even count as cheating! Click here for Day 4 recipes and instructions. Day Five The working week is almost over. Celebrate with some super healthy and filling porridge to help get you through to your superfood wrap at lunch. Once you’re back home, it’s time to start the weekend with a wonderful Thai fish curry. Yum! Click here for Day 5 recipes and instructions. Day Six Start your Saturday like a New Yorker, with turkey and avocado on top of a slice of toasted rye. Serve up a fig and Parma ham salad for lunch before finishing your day with Dijon pork and a butter bean mash. Click here for Day 6 recipes and instructions. Day Seven You’ve almost done it! Congratulations. Probably the easiest and tastiest diet that you’ve ever had to follow, right? Finish in style with a mushroom omelette sandwich for breakfast, a chicken salad for lunch and some grilled salmon with a tangy citrus salsa for tea. Click here for Day 7 recipes and instructions. Get 75% off Champneys Healthy Breaks Relax, unwind and detox at the award-winning Champneys spa resorts. You’ll get 75% off Champneys Spa Days and one, two and three night Spa Stays. Find out more Terms and conditions apply.