Vitality At Home Series: Week 3 Recap. We’ve reached week 3 of the Vitality At Home series and this week, it’s all about dinner with the Vitality Roses. Check out a starter, main and dessert from three of England’s top netballers. Day 17: Halloumi Vegetable Skewers Iona Christian kicks us off with a great halloumi-based starter, perfect for the BBQ if have one. Otherwise, they’re just as good grilled in your oven. Prep time: 5 minutes Cook time: 10 minutes Total time: 15 minutes Serves: 2 Ingredients 1 x courgette 1 onion A red pepper Handful of cherry tomatoes Packet of halloumi Sweet chill sauce Wooden skewers Method Peel your onion and chop into bite-sized chunks, along with your peppers, courgette and halloumi. Thread your chopped veggies and halloumi onto the skewers, distributing evenly along the stick. Place your stacked skewers onto the grill, sprinkling with olive oil and herbs of your choice. Place under your grill or throw onto the BBQ for 5 – 10 minutes, turning every few minutes to ensure they’re evenly cooked. Serve with a dollop of sweet chilli sauce for dipping – delicious! Day 18: Mustard & Leek Grilled Gnocchi Next, we have midcourter Yasmin Parsons serving us up with a tasty veggie main. Prep time: 10 minutes Cook time: 10 minutes Total time: 20 minutes Serves: 4 Ingredients Fresh potato gnocchi (you could make your own if you’re feeling adventurous!) 3 x leeks 200ml vegetable stock 200ml single cream 50g mature cheddar Handful of frozen peas 2 x tsps wholegrain mustard Oil of your choice Method Finely chop your leeks and fry off in the pan until soft and golden (around 5 minutes). Add in your frozen peas and stir around until warmed through. Cook your gnocchi as per package instructions. Mix your single cream, vegetable stock and wholegrain mustard together. Drain your gbocchi and lay onto a baking tray, along with your leek and frozen pea medley. Pour over your creamy, mustard mixture. Sprinkle with your cheese and place in the oven until the cheese bubbles. Remove and leave the gnocchi to rest for 5 minutes – then get ready to serve! Day 19: Chocolate Peanut Butter Brownies To finish off with something sweet, captain Natalie Haythornthwaite bakes up a storm with these gooey, chocolatey brownies. Prep time: 10 minutes Cook time: 12 minutes Total time: 22 minutes Makes 16 brownies Ingredients 140g dark chocolate, chopped into chunks 60g smooth peanut butter 20g runny honey 2 ripe bananas 30g cocoa powder 30ml almond milk 3 eggs, separated into yolk and whites Instructions Preheat the oven to 160C. Heat a large saucepan of water. Put your dark chocolate, peanut butter honey in a bowl over the saucepan and stir until melted. Then, in another bowl, mash the banana until smooth and stir in the milk an egg yolks. Add in the melted chocolate mixture. Whisk the egg whites, and then fold gently into the mixture. Finally, pour the batter into a brownie tray and bake for 12-14 minutes. Remove from the oven, allow to cool and then enjoy! Looking for more of this? Check out what happened in weeks 1 and 2 and see what else is in our Vitality At Home series. Follow the full series over on our Instagram: @vitality_uk .