Vitality At Home Series: Week 2 Recap. Published: 10 April 2020 It’s week 2 of the Vitality At Home series – our way of helping you keep sane, happy and healthy while we’re all spending more time at home. Here’s what we shared this week… Day 8: Banana Pancakes Paralympian and swimmer Ellie Simmonds walks us through her easy banana pancakes recipe. Make them naughty or nice depending on what you fancy. Prep time: 5 minutes Cook time: 5 minutes Total time: 10 minutes Serves: 2 Ingredients 1 x banana 1 x egg Scoop of flour ½ tsp of baking powder Splash of milk Honey, fruit and yogurt for serving Method Mash up your banana in a bowl, crack in your egg and add your flour, baking powder and milk. Stir it all together until the mixture forms the consistency of smooth, thin paste. Add a dollop of coconut oil to your frying pan and get it nice and hot. Add in two big spoonfuls of your mixture and fry off until golden brown, flipping the pancakes to ensure they’re evenly cooked. Once cooked, stack your pancakes on top of each other and get ready for the fun bit – adding your toppings. Ellie’s opted to keep her pancakes healthy with fruit, yogurt and a squeeze of honey, but you can add whatever you like to yours – chocolate, cinnamon or syrup. Day 10: Abs Blaster Jessica Ennis-Hill gives our abs the once-over with her simple abs-blaster circuit. Tweak as needed to suit your fitness level Complete 10 reps of the following 10 exercises – and if you really want to push yourself, repeat the circuit as many times as you can! 1. Reverse crunch 2. Crunches 3. Elbow to knee (left) 4. Elbow to knee (right) 5. Flutters 6. Cross over scissors 7. Plank openers (right) 8. Plank toe lifts 9. Plank openers (left) 10. Side to sides Day 11: Prawn & Tomato Pasta England cricketer Joe Root cooks up a storm with this quick and delicious prawn and tomato pasta recipe. Perfect for those days when you want something easy to make. Prep time: 5 minutes Cook time: 20 minutes Total time: 25 minutes Serves: 2 Ingredients 2 x fistfuls of pasta 1 x clove of garlic; crushed Cherry tomatoes 1 tsp tomato puree 2 x handful of spinach 1 x packet of cooked king prawns Squeeze of lemon Sprinkle of cheese for serving Salt and pepper to season Method Boil the pasta according to packet instructions. Fry off the tomatoes, garlic, tomato puree until nice and soft. Add in your spinach, squeezing in your lemon and salt and pepper to taste. Throw your prawns in and mix around to coat in the sauce. Combine your pasta with the sauce, sprinkle on your cheese and et voila – dinner is served. Enjoyed this? See what we got up to in week 1 and check out more from our Vitality At Home series. Follow the full series over on our Instagram: @vitality_uk .