Waitrose & Partners King Prawn Stir-Fried Rice. We all know that eating well is a key ingredient to being healthy. So to help make it easier and more rewarding for you to take the good food option, we’ve partnered with Waitrose & Partners to reward eligible Vitality members with cashback on healthy food . To get you inspired on your healthy food journey, why not try this delicious and simple King Prawn Stir-fried Rice recipe, all made with Good Health food. Preparation time: 15 minutes Cooking time: 10 minutes Total time: 25 minutes Serves: 2 Ingredients 2 tsp vegetable oil 2 British blacktail free range eggs, beaten 150g essential raw king prawns 125g spring greens, finely shredded 100g LoveLife basmati brown rice, cooked and cooled 100g frozen peas 6cm piece cucumber 2 salad onions, thinly sliced Pinch crushed chilli flakes Juice ½ lime 2 tsp Cooks’ Ingredients kimchi paste 2 tsp reduced-salt soy sauce 1 tbsp roasted peanuts, crushed Method 1. Heat 1 tsp of the oil in a large wok or non-stick frying pan on a medium heat. Pour in the egg, tilt the pan so it forms a thin omelette, and cook for about 1 minute until set. Tip out onto a board, roll up, then slice into thin ribbons and set aside. 2. Heat the remaining oil in the pan, add prawns and spring greens, raise the heat and stir-fry for 2 minutes. Add the rice and peas, and continue to cook for a further 5 minutes or so until piping hot. 3. Meanwhile, halve the cucumber lengthways and scoop out the seeds. Thinly slice and mix together with the salad onions, chilli and lime juice. 4. Stir the kimchi paste and soy sauce into the hot rice and divide between bowls. Top with the egg, cucumber salad and crushed peanuts, to serve. More Waitrose & Partners recipes This recipe appeared in Waitrose Health, Spring/Summer 2019 issue You can pick up recipe cards for free every month in Waitrose & Partners stores Want more inspiration? Why not also try Waitrose & Partners Spinach & Ricotta Eggs or Waitrose & Partners Shawarma Chicken With Pomegrante and Tahini Don’t forget, if you’re a Vitality member with an eligible plan, you could get up to 25% cashback on selected Waitrose & Partners Good Health food (excluding beverages) when you get active. If you have a second eligible health insurance or life insurance plan, you could get up to 40% cashback.