Waitrose & Partners Shawarma Chicken With Pomegranate & Tahini. We all know that eating well is a key ingredient to being healthy. So to make it easier and more rewarding for you to take the good food option, we’ve partnered with Waitrose & Partners to reward eligible Vitality members with cashback on healthy food. To get you inspired on your healthy food journey, why not try this delicious and simple Shawarma Chicken With Pomegranate & Tahini recipe, all made with Good Health food. Preparation time: 10 minutes Cooking time: 35 minutes Total time: 45 minutes Serves: 4 Ingredients 1 tbsp cold pressed rapeseed oil Pack of 6 (about 485g) Waitrose & Partners No.1 Free Range Chicken Thigh Fillets, each halved 2 onions, roughly chopped 2 tbsp Belazu Shawarma Paste 400g can chickpeas, drained 1½ tbsp Belazu Tahini 100g low fat Greek style yogurt 1 unwaxed lemon, zest of all, juice of ½ 1 medium pomegranate, seeds (or 4 tbsp seeds) Handful flat leaf parsley, roughly chopped Method 1. Heat the oil in a wide, non-stick frying pan. Add the chicken and onions, season and cook for 10 minutes over a medium-high heat, until the onions are caramelised and the chicken browned. Turn the chicken halfway through cooking and move the onions around the pan a few times. 2. Stir in the shawarma paste and let it sizzle for 2 minutes until fragrant. Add 250ml water and the chickpeas. Partially cover with a lid and simmer for 25 minutes, until the chicken is tender and cooked through, the juices run clear and no pink meat remains, and the chickpeas are in a thick sauce. (Add a splash of water as it cooks, if needed.) Season. 3. Meanwhile, mix the tahini, yogurt, lemon zest and 1 tbsp juice. Loosen with 2 tsp water then season. When the chicken is ready, drizzle with a little of the tahini yogurt and scatter with the pomegranate seeds and parsley. Serve with the rest of the lemon cut into wedges for squeezing, and flatbreads on the side, if liked. Top tip To make this go further, shred the chicken using two forks. Load onto wraps or flatbreads, then top with the tahini, pomegranate and parsley. More Waitrose & Partners recipes This recipe appeared in the Waitrose & Partners November 2019 recipe card collection You can pick up recipe cards for free every month in Waitrose & Partners stores Want more inspiration? Why not also try Waitrose & Partners Spinach & Ricotta Eggs or Waitrose & Partners King Prawn Stir Fried Rice As a Vitality member, you could get up to 25% cashback on Waitrose & Partners Good Health food when you get active. If you have a second eligible health insurance or life insurance plan, you could get up to 40% cashback. Excludes beverages. Log in to Member Zone for the details.