Waitrose & Partners Spinach And Ricotta Baked Eggs. We all know that eating well is a key ingredient to being healthy. So to help make it easier and more rewarding for you to take the good food option, we’ve partnered with Waitrose & Partners to reward eligible Vitality members with cashback on healthy food . To get you inspired on your healthy food journey, why not try this delicious and simple Spinach & Ricotta Baked Eggs recipe, all made with Good Health food. Preparation time: 10 minutes Cooking time: 20 minutes Total time: 30 minutes Serves: 2 Ingredients 450g essential spinach 2 tsp olive oil 2 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 1 tsp chilli flakes 50g Italian ricotta ½ lemon, zest pinch ground nutmeg 4 eggs 2 essential pitta breads, cut into 2cm strips Method 1. Preheat the oven to 200˚C, gas mark 6. Boil the kettle. Put the spinach in a colander in the sink, then pour over the boiling water so the spinach starts to wilt. Leave to drain for 5 minutes, then gently squeeze out any excess water. 2. Heat 1 tsp oil in an ovenproof frying pan over a medium heat. Add the garlic and chilli flakes and cook for 30 seconds. Add the wilted spinach, season and stir to combine. Reduce the heat, then transfer ¹⁄ ³ of the mixture to a glass jug. Add 2 tbsp ricotta and use a stick blender to whizz until smooth, then return to the frying pan and mix in. Stir through the lemon zest and nutmeg. 3. Make 4 wells in the spinach mixture and crack the eggs into the holes. Remove from the heat and dot the remaining ricotta around the pan. Transfer to the oven and bake the eggs for 12-14 minutes, until the whites are set and the yolks are cooked to your liking. Meanwhile, put the pitta strips on a baking sheet, drizzle with the remaining 1 tsp oil, season and bake for 8-10 minutes. Serve the eggs straight away with the pitta chips for dunking. More Waitrose & Partners recipes This recipe appeared in Waitrose & Partners Food, November 2019 issue You can pick up recipe cards for free every month in Waitrose & Partners stores Want more inspiration? Why not also try Waitrose & Partners King Prawn Stir-Fried Rice or Waitrose & Partners Shawarma Chicken With Pomegrante and Tahini Don’t forget, if you’re a Vitality member with an eligible plan, you could get up to 25% cashback on selected Waitrose & Partners Good Health food (excluding beverages) when you get active. If you have a second eligible health insurance or life insurance plan you could get up to 40% cashback.