Weight Watchers Herby Veg Hash With Poached Eggs. We’ve mixed these sweet, waxy little spuds with lots of fresh herbs to make a delicious vegetable hash. SmartPoints values Per serve: 4 Per recipe: 15 15 minutes preparation 35 minutes cooking Serves 4 Ingredients: 600g potatoes, raw, larger ones halved 6 sprays calorie controlled cooking spray 2 medium courgettes, halved lengthways, then sliced on the diagonal 1 medium yellow pepper, deseeded and sliced into thin wedges 1 teaspoon thyme, fresh, chopped, plus extra leaves to garnish 1 large red onion, sliced into thin wedges 200g cherry tomatoes, halved 1 teaspoon white wine vinegar 4 medium eggs, whole, raw 1 teaspoon basil, fresh, finely chopped, plus extra leaves to garnish 1 teaspoon parsley, fresh, finely chopped 4 teaspoons hot pepper sauce (Tabasco), to serve (optional) Method: Bring a large pan of salted water to the boil. Add the potatoes and boil for 3-4 minutes until just tender. Drain and leave to dry. In a large bowl, combine the courgettes and pepper, mist with cooking spray and toss together with the chopped thyme. Generously mist a large pan with the spray, then cook the onion until soft, about 4-5 minutes, over a medium-low heat. Add the potatoes, courgettes and pepper with plenty of seasoning. Add a splash of water, lower the heat, and cover; cook for 15 minutes, until the potatoes are cooked through. Remove the lid, increase the heat to high and cook, stirring, until the vegetables start to char, about 4 minutes. Scrape them into a large bowl and put the tomatoes in the pan. Cook, stirring often, until softened and starting to darken; this should take no more than a minute. Return all the vegetables to the pan and set aside. Bring a large, wide pan of water to a simmer and add the vinegar. Crack 1 egg into a small cup and then carefully pour into the pan in one go. Repeat with the remaining eggs. Cook for 3 minutes until the whites are firm and the yolks soft. Remove from the pan with a slotted spoon and drain on a plate lined with kitchen paper. Toss the chopped herbs through the veg, then divide between 4 plates. Top with the eggs, the herb garnish, freshly ground black pepper, and Tabasco, if using. Get your Weight Watchers 6 month pass for just £30 Sign up now Terms and conditions apply. WW