Weight loss recipe plan: Thursday. Champneys Senior Nutritionist Becki Douglas has developed a one-week weight loss eating challenge that is not only healthy and will leave you feeling revitalised, but is also easy to stick to all year round. So if you’re reading this in the new year as part of your resolution, or just fancy shedding some pounds anytime, stick to these 21 recipes or choose the ones you enjoy and give our 7-day challenge a go! Your halfway there. Treat yourself to a ham and egg cup, roasted vegetable and lentil salad and a spicy ragu with courgette fettuccini. And the great thing about it is that this “cheat” day doesn’t even count as cheating! Once you’re all finished for day four, head over to day five ! Breakfast Ham and Egg Cups – Serves 1 Ingredients: Low calorie spray 2 large slices of ham 2 medium eggs 40g spinach, wilted 1 tsp tomato purée, mixed with Tabasco sauce (optional) 1 spring onion, thinly sliced Herbs and seasoning of choice 1 medium tomato, sliced to serve Method: Preheat oven to 180°C/160°C Fan/Gas mark 4. Lightly grease two cups of a standard-sized muffin tin with low calorie cooking spray. Line the cups with the ham slices before spreading a small dollop of the tomato purée mix on top. Wilt the spinach and split between the two cups. Carefully crack an egg into each ham and spinach lined cup. Sprinkle with salt and pepper to taste. Bake in the oven for around 15-20 minutes, until the egg whites are set but the yolks are still nice and runny. Sprinkle with the spring onion and serve with sliced tomatoes. Lunch Roasted Vegetable, Puy Lentil and Goat’s Cheese Salad – Serves 1 Ingredients: 200g Mediterranean chargrilled vegetables, cooked and cooled (these can be bought frozen in most supermarkets) 100g ready-to-eat Puy lentils 30g Goat’s cheese Handful of mixed leaves 1 tsp olive oil 1 tsp balsamic vinegar 1 tsp Dijon mustard 1 tsp lemon juice 1 tsp fresh basil, chopped 1 tsp flat leaf parsley, chopped Method: Mix the vegetables, Puy lentils, Goat’s cheese and mixed leaves together and season with some salt and freshly ground black pepper. Whisk together the remaining ingredients to create a dressing and drizzle on top of the salad just before serving. Dinner Courgette Fettuccini with Spicy Ragu – Serves 2 Ingredients: 250g turkey/Quorn mince 1 tsp olive oil 1 small onion, finely chopped 1 stick celery, finely chopped ½ red pepper, finely chopped 1 garlic clove, finely chopped 2 tsp tomato purée 400g tin chopped tomatoes 1 tsp oregano Handful flat leaf parsley, chopped 150ml chicken or vegetable stock 1 tbsp balsamic vinegar 2 medium courgettes 1 tsp Parmesan cheese, grated Method: Heat the olive oil over a moderate heat and fry the onion, celery, pepper and garlic for five minutes until softened but not brown. Add the tomato puree, oregano and parsley and stir while still over the heat. After one minute, add the minced turkey/Quorn and fry over the heat until sealed and opaque, breaking up any lumps with a wooden spoon. Pour in the tinned tomatoes and stock and season with salt and black pepper. Stir well, bring to a gentle simmer and allow to bubble away for 15 minutes. After, add the balsamic vinegar and cook for five minutes longer. Ten minutes before you’re ready to eat, it’s time to make the courgette fettuccini. Start by getting a vegetable peeler and peeling the courgette lengthways to make ribbons. Steam these for about 4-5 minutes or sauté in a pan with herbs and garlic until tender. Add your courgette fettuccini to the ragu and mix thoroughly over a low heat. Serve in deep, warmed bowls and sprinkle with Parmesan and fresh parsley. Get 75% off Champneys Healthy Breaks Relax, unwind and detox at the award-winning Champneys spa resorts. You’ll get 75% off Champneys Spa Days and one, two and three night Spa Stays. Find out more Terms and conditions apply.