Weight loss recipe plan: Wednesday. Champneys Senior Nutritionist Becki Douglas has developed a one-week weight loss eating challenge that is not only healthy and will leave you feeling revitalised, but is also easy to stick to all year round. So if you’re reading this in the new year as part of your resolution, or just fancy shedding some pounds anytime, stick to these 21 recipes or choose the ones you enjoy and give our 7-day challenge a go! Try Becki’s grainless granola. Follow that with a Thai curry soup for lunch and a chorizo tortilla for tea and you’ve gone and completed day three! Once you’re all finished for day three, head over to day four ! Breakfast Grainless Granola – Serves 4 Ingredients: 30g raw almonds, sliced 30g walnuts, chopped 30g dried apple, chopped 15g dried cranberries 15g goji berries 30g coconut flakes pinch of cinnamon 0% Total Greek yoghurt, to serve Handful fresh/frozen berries, to serve Method: Toss the almonds, walnuts, dried apple, cranberries, goji berries, coconut flakes and cinnamon together to create your grainless granola. This should make around four portions, so store any you don’t use in a Tupperware container for another day. Top your portion with some 0% Total Greek yoghurt and a handful of fresh or frozen berries for a great and healthy start to your day! Lunch Thai Vegetable Soup with Tofu – Serves 2 Ingredients: 1 tsp Thai red curry paste ½ teaspoon grated fresh ginger 300ml vegetable stock 250ml coconut milk 100g mushrooms, stems removed, thinly sliced 80g green beans, halved 1 carrot, peeled, halved lengthwise and sliced 200g tofu (extra-firm) drained and cut into cubes 80g sugar-snap peas 1 tbsp fresh lime juice Handful torn fresh basil leaves 1 chilli pepper, chopped (optional) Method: Pop the curry paste and ginger into a medium-sized saucepan. Whisk in the stock, coconut milk, a seasoning of salt and bring to a boil. Add the mushrooms, green beans and carrots and simmer until just tender – around 3 to 5 minutes. Add the tofu and sugar snaps and simmer until the snow peas are bright green – about 1 minute more. Stir in the lime juice and sprinkle with the basil to finish. If you like it hot, serve with some freshly chopped chilli! Dinner Spanish Tortilla with Chorizo, Tomato and Peppers – Serves 2 Ingredients: 250g small new potatoes, skin left on 10 baby cherry tomatoes, halved 2 tsp olive oil 1 medium onion, chopped 1 red pepper, chopped 1 clove garlic, minced 3 whole eggs 2 egg whites, beaten 50g chorizo, sliced Pink Himalayan sea salt and freshly ground black pepper, to taste Handful fresh chopped parsley Method: Preheat oven to 180°C/160°C Fan/Gas mark 4. Boil potatoes for around 20 minutes until they’re tender. Drain, slice and return to saucepan. Heat 1 tsp of the olive oil in a non-stick oven-proof frying pan. Add the onion, pepper and garlic, and cook for 7-8 minutes or until the vegetables are tender. Add in the tomatoes and cook for a couple more minutes, stirring occasionally. In a large bowl, beat the eggs and egg whites until fully mixed before adding in the chorizo and chopped parsley. Gently stir in the cooked potatoes and onion mixture. Add the remaining oil to the frying pan. Pour in the egg mixture and place in oven. Bake for around 20 minutes or until the top is browned and a knife comes out clean when inserted in the centre. Remove from the oven when cooked and leave to cool slightly, before serving in wedges with sautéed garlic kale or a spinach salad. Get 75% off Champneys Healthy Breaks Relax, unwind and detox at the award-winning Champneys spa resorts. You’ll get 75% off Champneys Spa Days and one, two and three night Spa Stays. Find out more Terms and conditions apply.