Weight loss recipe plan: Tuesday. Champneys Senior Nutritionist Becki Douglas has developed a one-week weight loss eating challenge that is not only healthy and will leave you feeling revitalised, but is also easy to stick to all year round. So if you’re reading this in the new year as part of your resolution, or just fancy shedding some pounds anytime, stick to these 21 recipes or choose the ones you enjoy and give our 7-day challenge a go! A boiled egg with smoked salmon and asparagus soldiers for breakfast? A mediterranean tuna rice bowl for lunch? And a cauliflower crust pizza for dinner? Put down that diet book and pick up day two of our 7-day weight loss plan! Once you’re all finished for day two, head over to day three ! Breakfast Boiled Egg with Smoked Salmon and Asparagus Soldiers Ingredients: 1 medium soft boiled egg 1 slice wholemeal/rye toast 1 slice smoked salmon (around 25g) 1 tsp low fat soft cheese 5-6 asparagus spears (optional) Method: Spread the soft cheese on your toasted bread and top with smoked salmon. Cut these into soldiers. Soft boil an egg and serve in an egg cup with the top cut off. Steam the asparagus spears and use smoked salmon soldiers and asparagus spears to dip into the egg! Lunch Mediterranean Tuna Rice Bowl (serves 1) Ingredients: ½ sachet of microwaveable wholegrain rice, cooked and cooled 80g tuna (tinned or fresh) ½ red onion, chopped ½ red pepper, diced Handful cherry tomatoes 8 black olives ½ tsp dried thyme 1 tsp olive oil 1 tsp Dijon mustard 1 tsp white wine vinegar 1 clove fresh garlic, minced Salt and pepper to season Method: Combine the rice and tuna with the onion, red pepper, tomatoes, olives and thyme. Make a dressing by whisking the remaining ingredients, and toss the rice, tuna and vegetable mix with this vinaigrette. This can be served on its own, or with some mixed leaves, fresh parsley and lemon zest or juice. Dinner Cauliflower Crust Pizza – Topped YOUR WAY! (serves 2) Ingredients: 340g raw cauliflower, fresh or frozen 1 large free-range egg 75g reduced-fat mozzarella, 50g grated and the rest sliced for topping 2 tbsp finely grated Parmesan cheese ¼ tsp dried basil ¼ tsp dried oregano ¼ garlic powder Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper, to taste 2 medium tomatoes, thinly sliced 2 cloves fresh garlic, minced PLUS – a handful of your favourite healthy toppings. I personally love courgette and mushroom! Method: Pre-heat the oven to 210°C/420°F/Gas mark 7 and line a pizza stone or tray (or just an ordinary baking tray) with greaseproof paper. Grate the cauliflower or process it in a food processor – you are looking to achieve fine crumbs, but do not purée it. If using frozen cauliflower, squeeze the excess water out of it and crumble with your hands if possible. Microwave the cauliflower crumbs for 5 to 6 minutes, or until soft. You can also steam or boil the cauliflower but you will need to squeeze the excess water out of it afterwards if cooked with water. Place the cauliflower crumbs in to a large mixing bowl and add the egg, grated mozzarella, Parmesan, herbs, garlic powder and salt and pepper. Mix it well and you should be left with a fairly stiff but malleable dough. Place the cauliflower “dough” onto the prepared tray and pat out into a large circle, about 12.5cm (10″) in diameter and about 1.5cm (1/2″) thick. Spray the top with a little low-fat cooking spray and bake for 15 to 20 minutes, or until golden brown and firm. Place the sliced tomatoes on top, scatter over the minced garlic season to taste with salt and pepper, and then arrange your toppings and the sliced mozzarella cheese over the top. Bake for 10 minutes or until the topping is bubbling and the cheese has melted. Get 75% off Champneys Healthy Breaks Relax, unwind and detox at the award-winning Champneys spa resorts. You’ll get 75% off Champneys Spa Days and one, two and three night Spa Stays. Find out more Terms and conditions apply.