Weight Watchers Earl Grey Scones With Blueberry Jam. These tea-flavoured scones are served with a delicious blueberry compote and Greek yogurt. SmartPoints values Per serve: 5 Per recipe: 64 20 minutes preparation 15 minutes cooking Serves 12 Ingredients: 150ml skimmed milk 3 Morrisons tea bags, Earl Grey 375g plain white flour, plus extra for dusting 20g baking powder 75g low fat spread 50g caster sugar 3 medium eggs, whole, raw Zest of 1 lemon 500g blueberries 1 tablespoon cornflour, level, mixed with a splash of water 1 teaspoon vanilla extract, level 150g 0% fat natural Greek yogurt Method: Put the milk in a pan and bring to a simmer. Add the tea bags, remove from the heat and leave to steep until the milk has cooled to room temperature, then discard the tea bags. Put the flour, baking powder and spread in a large mixing bowl and use your fingertips to rub together until the mixture resembles the texture of breadcrumbs. Stir in the sugar. In a separate bowl, whisk 2 of the eggs together with the cooled infused milk, then add to the mixing bowl along with the lemon zest. Stir to form a sticky dough. Line a baking sheet with baking paper. Dust a work surface with flour and knead the dough for 3-5 minutes. Roll out to a thickness of 3cm and cut out 12 rounds using a 6cm cutter – you will need to reroll the trimmings. Put the scones on the prepared baking sheet, leaving room for them to expand. Rest at room temperature for 45 minutes to 1 hour. Preheat the oven to 220°C, fan 200°C, gas mark 7. Beat the remaining egg in a small bowl and brush over the scones. Bake for 15 minutes or until risen and golden. Meanwhile, put the blueberries in a small pan over a medium heat. Cook for 7 minutes or until the blueberries are beginning to split and release their juice. Stir in the cornflour paste and cook for 3 minutes until thickened. Stir in the vanilla extract and set aside to cool. Serve the scones topped with the blueberry compote and the Greek yogurt. Get your Weight Watchers 6 month pass for just £30 Sign up now Terms and conditions apply. WW