Weight Watchers Fresh Berry Sponge. A whisked sponge uses no fat, which makes it light and airy. SmartPoints values Per serve: 7 Per recipe: 55 25 minutes preparation 9 minutes cooking Serves 8 Ingredients: 4 sprays calorie controlled cooking spray 3 medium eggs, whole, raw 100g caster sugar 100g plain white flour 200g low fat soft cheese Zest of 1 lemon 3 level teaspoons icing sugar 2 level tablespoons lemon curd 200g raspberries 125g blueberries 4 sprigs mint, fresh Method: Preheat the oven to Gas Mark 7/220°C/fan oven 200°C. Spray two 18 cm (7 inch) sandwich tins with the cooking spray and line the bases with circles of baking paper. Using a hand-held electric mixer, whisk the eggs and sugar together in a large bowl until very pale and light in texture – this will take about 5 minutes on full power. To check that the mixture is thick enough, switch off the mixer and lift up the beaters – they should leave a trail in the mixture for a few seconds. Sift the flour into the mixture and fold it through lightly but thoroughly, using a large metal spoon. Divide the mixture between the prepared tins and level the tops. Bake the cakes for 8–9 minutes until golden brown and springy to the touch. Remove from the oven and turn them out of the tins on to a cooling rack. Cover with a clean damp tea towel and leave until completely cold. Remove the lining paper. Mix together the low fat soft cheese, lemon zest and icing sugar. Spread half the mixture over the surface of one sponge, then spread the lemon curd over it (stir it well first). Top with most of the raspberries and blueberries. Sandwich the two cakes together and decorate the top with the rest of the soft cheese mixture, the remaining berries and mint leaves. Notes: Cooks tip – the secret of success is to whisk the eggs and sugar together until they increase in volume, then carefully fold through the flour so that you don’t lose the air you’ve just whisked in. Get your Weight Watchers 6 month pass for just £30 Sign up now Terms and conditions apply. WW