Weight loss recipe plan: Monday. Champneys Senior Nutritionist Becki Douglas has developed a one-week weight loss eating challenge that is not only healthy and will leave you feeling revitalised, but is also easy to stick to all year round. So if you’re reading this in the new year as part of your resolution, or just fancy shedding some pounds anytime, stick to these 21 recipes or choose the ones you enjoy and give our 7-day challenge a go! Start the day with a cocoa-nut protein smoothie and end with cod and prawn fish cakes with a sumptuous avocado aioli. Oh, and for lunch, delve into a mango chicken jam jar salad. Who said dieting had to be dull?! Once you’re all finished for day one, head over to day two ! Breakfast Cocoa-Nut Protein Smoothie Ingredients: 150ml coconut/almond milk ½ banana ½ avocado 1 tsp raw cacao powder 1 tsp almond butter 2 tbsp chia seeds 30g hemp protein powder ½ tsp cinnamon Method: Blitz all the ingredients together in a blender. Serve immediately for a nutritious start to the day. Lunch Mango Chicken Jam Jar Salad Ingredients: 2 tbsp lemon, blueberry and chia seed vinaigrette (see recipe below) 1 tsp sunflower seeds, pine nuts or chopped pecans 70g cooked chicken, shredded 1 cucumber, chopped ¼ mango, chopped 25g reduced fat mozzarella, cut into small cubes Handful of baby spinach Handful of romaine lettuce Method: Layer your ingredients into a large jam/mason jar in the above order, starting with the vinaigrette and finishing with the lettuce. Doing it in this order will keep your salad fresh until lunchtime, with the leaves and vegetables not sitting in the dressing – just make sure you keep your jar upright! Lemon, Blueberry and Chia Seed Vinaigrette Ingredients: 100g blueberries Juice of two lemons 4 tbsp olive oil 1 tbsp honey, maple syrup, or agave nectar Salt and pepper, to taste 1 tbsp chia seeds Method: Combine the blueberries, lemon juice, olive oil and honey (or maple syrup or agave) in your blender, and blend on medium-low speed until smooth. Season to taste with salt and pepper, and stir in chia seeds. The dressing will keep in the fridge for up to a week. Dinner Cod and Prawn Fish Cakes with Avocado Aioli (serves 2) Ingredients: Calorie controlled cooking spray 2 spring onions, chopped roughly 1 clove garlic, crushed 1 tsp fresh ginger, grated ½ green or red chilli, de-seeded and chopped 125g raw cod or skinless haddock fillets, cut into chunks 75g peeled and cooked prawns (thawed if frozen) 1 tbsp Thai fish sauce, or light soy sauce ¼ tsp salt (optional) ¼ tsp black pepper (to taste) 1 tsp dried coriander ½ lemon, cut into wedges, to serve 1 tbsp avocado aioli, to serve (see recipe below) Method: Put the onions, garlic, ginger and chilli into a food processor and blitz for a few seconds until finely chopped. Place the fish in the processor with the prawns, fish sauce, coriander and pepper. Blend everything together until the mixture looks mashed and just begins to hold together. Be careful not to over-process – if you do, you will end up with purée. Add the cooking spray to a large, non-stick frying-pan so that it covers the base. Take a small spoonful of the mixture and fry it for a minute or so on each side, then cool and taste it. If you think it needs it, mix in the salt. Using hands dipped in cold water, shape the mixture into eight patties. Reheat the pan. When the pan is hot cook the patties for 3 minutes on each side until they feel firm and golden brown. Drain the patties on kitchen paper and serve garnished with the lemon or lime wedges, 1 tbsp of the avocado aioli and steamed green beans. Avocado Aioli Ingredients: 1 medium, ripe avocado 50ml reduced fat sour cream 1 tbsp basil, chopped 1 tsp garlic, minced 1 tbsp fresh lemon juice ¼ tsp chilli flakes Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste Method: Cut the avocados in half lengthwise. Remove the pit from the avocado but don’t discard it – it can come in handy later. Remove the avocado flesh from the skin and place onto a chopping board. Slice the avocado into 1-inch pieces and put into a blender. Add the rest of the ingredients into the blender and process until smooth. Taste and add salt and lemon juice if needed. If the mixture is too thick, add a teaspoon of water and blend until smooth. If you’re not using all of the aioli, pop the avocado pit back into the remaining sauce and store in the fridge with clingfilm on top. Throw out once the aioli starts to brown.