Weight loss recipe plan: Saturday. Champneys Senior Nutritionist Becki Douglas has developed a one-week weight loss eating challenge that is not only healthy and will leave you feeling revitalised, but is also easy to stick to all year round. So if you’re reading this in the new year as part of your resolution, or just fancy shedding some pounds anytime, stick to these 21 recipes or choose the ones you enjoy and give our 7-day challenge a go! Start your Saturday like a New Yorker, with turkey and avocado on top of a slice of toasted rye. Serve up a fig and Parma ham salad for lunch before finishing your day with Dijon pork and a butter bean mash. Once you’re all finished for day six, head over to day seven ! Breakfast New York-style Turkey and Avocado Toast Ingredients: 1 slice rye bread or wholemeal bread ¼ avocado 1 tsp olive oil Squeeze of lemon juice Pinch of salt Pinch of chilli flakes 1 tbsp cottage cheese 2 slices of turkey breast Method: Toast the bread. While waiting, mash up the avocado and mix with ½ tsp olive oil, lemon juice, salt and chilli flakes. Spread the avocado mix on the toast and top with 1 tbsp cottage cheese and the turkey breast. Lunch Fig, Parma Ham and Hazelnut Salad – Serves 2 4 ripe figs, quartered 6 slices Parma ham 60g reduced fat mozzarella, roughly chopped 2 heads little gem lettuce, leaves separated 100g green beans, briefly boiled for 2-3 minutes Handful fresh mint leaves, roughly chopped Handful rocket leaves 2 tbsp orange juice 1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil 1 tsp Dijon mustard 20g hazelnuts, toasted Method: Combine the lettuce, green beans, mint and rocket in a large bowl. Place the orange juice, oil and mustard into a screw-top jar and shake until combined. Coarsely crush the toasted hazelnuts with a rolling pin. Assemble the salad on a platter, arranging the figs, mozzarella and Parma ham on the top. Spoon over the dressing and top with the crushed nuts. Before serving, season with a little salt and freshly ground black pepper. Dinner Dijon Pork Fillet with Tarragon Butter Bean Mash and Greens – Serves 2 Ingredients: 2 pork fillet, preferably tenderloin 2 tbsp Dijon mustard 410g can butter beans, rinsed 1 tsp fresh rosemary, chopped 1 tsp butter 2 tbsp reduced fat crème fraîche 1 tsp dried tarragon, chopped 1 garlic clove, minced 100g rocket leaves Method: Rub the pork fillets with Dijon mustard and rosemary before grilling on a high heat for around 12-15 minutes – turning every few minutes so as not to burn them. Meanwhile, tip the butter beans into a saucepan and add the butter, crème fraîche, garlic and tarragon. Season with salt and pepper and stick the pan on a moderate heat for a couple of minutes. Coarsely mash the bean mixture together with a wooden spoon while it’s still on the heat. Be careful when mashing as the pan will be hot. Once it’s hot and bubbling, stir in the rocket until it has just wilted. Cut the cooked pork fillets into medallions and serve on the bean mash, drizzling with the cooking juices. Serve with freshly steamed asparagus. Get 75% off Champneys Healthy Breaks Relax, unwind and detox at the award-winning Champneys spa resorts. You’ll get 75% off Champneys Spa Days and one, two and three night Spa Stays. Find out more Terms and conditions apply.