Weight Watchers Coffee Tiramisu Cake. Yes, you can eat cake! This one is made with a whisked sponge, which means it doesn’t have any fat added to the cake mixture. SmartPoints values Per serve: 5 Per recipe: 41 25 minutes preparation 15 minutes cooking Serves 8 Ingredients: 5 sprays calorie controlled cooking spray 1 teaspoon ground coffee 3 medium raw eggs, whole 75g light brown sugar 75g plain white flour 250g Weight Watchers quark 100g Rachel’s Organic low fat vanilla yogurt 15ml liqueurs (3 tsp), high strength Tia Maria 1 teaspoon heaped cocoa powder, for sprinkling Method: Preheat the oven to Gas Mark 5/190°C/fan oven 170°C. Lightly grease 2 x 18cm sandwich tins with low fat cooking spray. Line the bases with circles of non-stick baking parchment or greaseproof paper. Put the coffee powder or granules into a cup and add 1 tbsp boiling water, stirring to dissolve. Whisk the eggs and sugar together using a hand-held electric whisk until pale, thick and very airy. This will take about 5 minutes. Whisk in the coffee liquid. Sift the flour into the mixture and fold it in lightly using a large metal spoon. Share the mixture between the cake tins and level the tops. Bake the cakes for 12-15 minutes, or until the tops spring back when pressed lightly. Cool on a wire rack for 5 minutes, then remove from the tins and peel away the lining paper. Cool completely. Beat the low fat soft cheese with a wooden spoon until softened, then stir in the vanilla yogurt and 1 tbsp Tia Maria or Marsala. Put one of the cakes on a serving plate and sprinkle the rest of the Tia Maria or Marsala evenly over the surface. Spread half the soft cheese mixture on top, then place the second cake in position. Cover with the remaining soft cheese mixture and sprinkle with cocoa powder. Keep in the refrigerator until ready to serve, though allow time for the cake to come up to room temperature to enjoy it at its best. Get your Weight Watchers 6 month pass for just £30 Sign up now Terms and conditions apply. WW