Weight loss recipe plan: Friday. Champneys Senior Nutritionist Becki Douglas has developed a one-week weight loss eating challenge that is not only healthy and will leave you feeling revitalised, but is also easy to stick to all year round. So if you’re reading this in the new year as part of your resolution, or just fancy shedding some pounds anytime, stick to these 21 recipes or choose the ones you enjoy and give our 7-day challenge a go! The working week is almost over. Celebrate with some super healthy and filling porridge to help get you through to your superfood wrap at lunch. Once you’re back home, it’s time to start the weekend with a wonderful Thai fish curry. Yum! Once you’re all finished for day five, head over to day six ! Breakfast Apple, Cinnamon, Chia and Oat Porridge with Pumpkin Seeds Ingredients: 20g rolled oats 20g chia seeds 150ml skimmed milk/almond milk 50ml water ½ tsp cinnamon (or more if you prefer) ½ tsp vanilla extract 1 apple, grated or chopped (keep the skin on!) 1 tsp pumpkin seeds Method: Heat the oats and chia seeds in a pan with the milk and water, cinnamon and half the apple for around 5-6 minutes until thickened. Serve the rest of the apple on top and sprinkle over the pumpkin seeds. Lunch Superfood Wrap Ingredients: 1 wholewheat tortilla wrap 2 tbsp houmous 1 beetroot, finely chopped 1 tsp sunflower seeds 1 spring onion, chopped Handful kale, chopped ½ green pepper, sliced Method: Combine the beetroot with houmous and pumpkin seeds. Season with salt and pepper. Spoon the mix into the centre of the tortilla wrap. Layer in the kale, spring onion and green pepper and serve, or roll in tin foil for later. Dinner Massaman Fish Curry with Sweet Potato – Serves 2 250ml coconut milk 2 tsp coconut flakes 200g white fish fillet, diced 300g sweet potato, cubed 20g salted peanuts 1-2 tsp Massaman Curry Paste, depending on how mild/hot you want it (can be substituted with any red curry paste for a slightly different taste) A splash of Thai fish sauce (optional) Squeeze of fresh lime juice Handful fresh coriander leaves, to serve (optional) Method: In a large, deep frying pan, gently heat the coconut milk with the curry paste and bring to the boil. Add the diced fish, cubed sweet potato, peanuts and coconut flakes and simmer for around 15 minutes. The sweet potato should be soft and the fish flakey. Add a splash of Thai fish sauce for an authentic flavour and garnish with lime and coriander. Serve with steamed tenderstem broccoli and mange tout. Get 75% off Champneys Healthy Breaks Relax, unwind and detox at the award-winning Champneys spa resorts. You’ll get 75% off Champneys Spa Days and one, two and three night Spa Stays. Find out more Terms and conditions apply.