Weight Watchers Bread Stick Bones With Pizza Dipping Sauce. What’s Halloween without skeletal remains and a pool of blood?! These bread stick bones are fun to make and will add a touch of ghastliness to the party table. SmartPoints values Per serve: 4 Per recipe: 65 25 minutes preparation 20 minutes cooking Serves 16 Ingredients: 250g plain white flour 250g strong white flour (bread flour) 1 sachet dried baking yeast 1 teaspoon salt 1 tablespoon olive oil 325ml water, warm 4 sprays calorie controlled cooking spray 75g parmesan cheese, grated 2 cloves garlic 1 level tablespoon tomato purèe 1 teaspoon dried mixed herbs 500g passata Method: Sift both flours into a large bowl then stir in the yeast and salt. Make a well and add the oil and enough of the water to make a soft but not sticky dough. Knead for 10 minutes on a lightly floured work surface – if the dough’s too sticky, add more flour. Transfer the dough to a lightly oiled bowl, cover with clingfilm and leave to rise in a warm, dry place for 1 hour, or until doubled in size. Preheat the oven to 190°C, fan 170°C, gas mark 5 and line 2 large baking sheets with baking paper. Turn the dough out onto a lightly floured surface and knock it back. Knead lightly, then divide into 16 equal-size balls. Roll each ball into a 14cm log, making the ends slightly thicker. Put onto the prepared baking sheets, and use scissors to cut slits in the ends. Gently stretch the ends then roll under to resemble bone ends. Mist with cooking spray and scatter 1 tsp parmesan over each bone. Bake for 10 minutes, then scatter over more parmesan, reserving 1 tbsp to decorate. Bake for 10 minutes or until golden. Meanwhile, to make the dipping sauce, mist a pan with cooking spray and cook the garlic over a medium heat for 1 minute. Add the tomato purée and herbs. Cook for another minute, then add the passata. Bring to a boil, then reduce the heat and simmer for 10 minutes. Leave to cool. Scatter the rest of the parmesan over the bread and serve with the sauce. Get your Weight Watchers 6 month pass for just £30 Sign up now Terms and conditions apply. Kids Recipes WW