Weight Watchers Mango And Avocado Rice Salad. This flavourful rice salad is perfect for warm summer evenings. Plus, it uses avocados and olive oil, two healthy-fat heroes. SmartPoints values Per serve: 7 Per recipe: 27 20 minutes preparation 25 minutes cooking Serves 4 Ingredients: 1 large can chickpeas, cooked, drained and rinsed 4 sprays calorie controlled cooking spray 75g white basmati rice, dry 75g wild rice, dry 1/2 teaspoon cumin seeds, level 1 teaspoon fresh lime juice 2 teaspoons olive oil 4 tablespoons coriander, fresh. 3 tbsp finely chopped, 1 tbsp roughly chopped for garnish 1/2 inch slice root ginger, grated 1 1/2 medium mangoes, peeled, stone removed and flesh diced 1 small red onion, thinly sliced 80g watercress 1 portion spinach 1 portion rocket 1 medium avocado pear, peeled, seed removed and flesh sliced Method: Preheat the oven to 200°C, fan 180°C, gas mark 6. Pat the chickpeas dry using kitchen paper. Put them in a bowl, mist with cooking spray and season, then toss to combine. Put the chickpeas in a roasting tin, in a single layer, and roast for 20 minutes, until they’re golden and slightly crisp. Set aside to cool. Meanwhile, put the rice in a medium pan and cover with 300ml water. Bring to the boil and then reduce the heat to low, cover and simmer for 10 minutes. Turn off the heat and leave covered for another 10 minutes. Spread the rice out on a large baking sheet and chill in the fridge. To make the dressing, toast the cumin seeds in a small frying pan over a medium-high heat for 2-3 minutes, until aromatic. Lightly crush using a pestle and mortar or the end of a rolling pin. Whisk together the oil and the lime juice, then stir in the coriander, ginger and crushed cumin seeds. Combine the chilled rice, roasted chickpeas, mango and onion in a large bowl, then pour over the dressing and toss to coat. Arrange the salad leaves on plates and top with the rice mixture. Add the avocado and serve garnished with the remaining coriander. Get your Weight Watchers 6 month pass for just £30 Sign up now Terms and conditions apply. WW