Weight loss recipe plan: Sunday. Champneys Senior Nutritionist Becki Douglas has developed a one-week weight loss eating challenge that is not only healthy and will leave you feeling revitalised, but is also easy to stick to all year round. So if you’re reading this in the new year as part of your resolution, or just fancy shedding some pounds anytime, stick to these 21 recipes or choose the ones you enjoy and give our 7-day challenge a go! You’ve almost done it! Congratulations. Probably the easiest and tastiest diet you’ve ever had to follow, right? Finish in style with a mushroom omelette sandwich for breakfast, a chicken salad for lunch and some grilled salmon with a tangy citrus salsa for tea. Once you’re all finished for day seven, pat yourself on the back. If you want, you could even start all over again on day one ! Breakfast Mushroom Omelette Sandwich Ingredients: Low calorie cooking spray 2 large flat mushrooms 2 tbsp tomato purée 1 fresh chilli, chopped (optional) ¼ tsp garlic powder 1 whole egg 1 egg white 25g chopped feta cheese Handful spinach 1 tsp chives, chopped Method: Preheat the oven to 160°C/140°C Fan/Gas mark 3. Wash the mushrooms and remove their stalks before patting dry with some kitchen towel. Thinly spread the tomato purée and, if using, sprinkle with chilli. Season with salt, pepper, the garlic powder and a few squirts of the cooking spray before sticking them on a tray and roasting in the oven for 20-25 minutes. While your mushroom buns are roasting, make an omelette in a small frying pan – combing the egg and egg white, feta cheese, spinach and chives. Once cooked, turn the omelette out and cut into two circles that are similar in diameter to the mushrooms. Sandwich the omelette rounds in between the mushroom buns and serve with a garnish of some fresh spinach leaves. Lunch Tricolore Chicken Salad Ingredients: ½ avocado, sliced 80g cooked chicken breast, cooled and chopped 4 tomatoes, diced (*if you can get a variety of colours and sizes this looks really attractive!) 50g reduced fat mozzarella Small handful fresh Basil leaves, to serve Handful mixed leaves (optional) 1tsp extra virgin olive oil 1tsp balsamic vinegar 1tsp clear honey ½ clove garlic, minced Method: Combine the tomato, avocado, mozzarella, basil and, if using, mixed leaves and season with a little salt and ground black pepper. Whisk the olive oil, balsamic vinegar, honey and garlic together to create a dressing. Pour this over the salad before topping with the chopped pieces of chicken. Dinner Grilled Salmon with Tangy Tomato Citrus Salsa – Serves 2 Ingredients: 2 salmon fillets (around 120g each) ½ medium orange, peeled and segmented ½ lemon, peeled and segmented ½ green or red chilli, finely chopped 2 medium tomatoes, finely diced ½ red onion, finely diced Handful fresh coriander, chopped ½ tsp honey or stevia (optional) ½ tsp dried oregano ½ tsp dried basil Method: Dry fry the salmon fillets skin side down until the skin crisps. Finish them in the oven for 12-15 minutes on 180°C/160°C Fan/Gas mark 4 to cook through until tender but still moist. Meanwhile, roughly chop the orange and lemon segments, retaining all of the juice that builds up while peeling and chopping. Combine the citrus fruit and juice with the remaining ingredients to create the salsa. The salsa can then be served immediately or refrigerated until later if needed. Top the baked salmon with the salsa and serve with some roasted vegetables . Get 75% off Champneys Healthy Breaks Relax, unwind and detox at the award-winning Champneys spa resorts. You’ll get 75% off Champneys Spa Days and one, two and three night Spa Stays. Find out more Terms and conditions apply.