Where’s Stanley? Competition Terms And Conditions. VITALITY HALF TERM LOCKDOWN CAMPAIGN – WHERE’S STANLEY PRIZE DRAW (the “Prize Draw”) TERMS AND CONDITIONS The Prize Draw is open to all Eligible Participants who comply with these Terms and Conditions. For the purposes of this Prize Draw: a. “ Activity Points ” means points awarded to Eligible Participants under their Vitality insurance policy for any points-earning physical activity (as specified by the Promoter). b. “Stanley soft toy Prize” means one of a total of 50 Stanley soft toys c. “ Prize Draw Period” means from Monday 15 February 2021 to midnight Sunday 21 February 2021. d. “ Draw Date” means Friday 5 March 2021; e. “ Eligible Participant” means any individual who: i. is aged 18 years or over and resident in the United Kingdom; and ii. complies with these terms and conditions. All members of staff of the Promoter (including their families) and any third parties or agencies connected with or involved in the administration of the Prize Draw will be excluded from winning the Prize Draw. “ Promoter” means Vitality Corporate Services Limited (company number 05933141) of 3 More London Riverside, London SE1 2AQ trading as VitalityHealth, VitalityLife and VitalityInvest; and 3. The Prize Draw is free to enter and no purchase is necessary. 4. An Eligible Participant will be entered into the Prize Draw where they complete the following conditions: a. Correctly answer the questions at: https://forms.office.com/Pages/ResponsePage.aspx?id=q4GdsF1ZzU2rJGpWVuGNiQesnhb3kdBBlU88yGOUg21UQ1E4R1dHMkw5SjdMUklCN1U4VzBDOFExUS4u 5. Eligible Participants who have met the requirements in clause 4 will each be given one entry into the Prize Draw. On the Draw Date, the Promoter will draw the names of Eligible Participants at random (supervised by an independent person), and the Prizes will be awarded via post and delivered from Monday 8 th March 2021. 6. The Promoter accepts no responsibility for entries lost, stolen or unsuccessfully completed due to a technical fault, technical malfunction, computer hardware or software failure, satellite, network or server failure of any kind. 7. The decision of the Promoter regarding any aspect of the Prize Draw is final and binding and no correspondence will be entered into about it. 8. Other than as set out in clause 9, the Prize is not transferable, non-exchangeable and cannot be redeemed for cash. 9. The Promoter reserves the right to substitute the Prize with another prize of similar value in the event the Prize is unavailable due to circumstances beyond the Promoter’s reasonable control. 10. The Promoter reserves the right to refuse to award the Prize to anyone in breach of these Terms and Conditions. 11. The Promoter reserves the right to void, cancel, suspend, or amend the Prize where it becomes necessary to do so including in the event of fraudulent behaviour. 12. Insofar as is permitted by law, the Promoter, its agents or distributors will not in any circumstances be responsible or liable to compensate the winner or accept any liability for any loss, damage, personal injury or death occurring as a result of taking up the Prize except where it is caused by the negligence of the Promoter, its agents or distributors or that of their employees. The statutory rights of Eligible Participants are not affected. 13. The Prize Draw will be governed by English law and Eligible Participants submit to the jurisdiction of the English courts. 14. The name and county of the Prize Draw winners will be made available on request by writing to the Marketing department, Vitality Corporate Services Limited, 4th Floor, 70 Gracechurch Street, London, EC3V 0XL.