Where do I find my sports team?. Ready to try a new sport? Whether it’s football, hockey, rugby or netball, here’s how you can get started with your local team No matter your age, fitness ability or interest, there’s a sports team out there for you. Joining is easy and the benefits of being involved in a team sport are proven to go beyond fitness – from making new friends and building confidence to improving your teamwork skills and de-stressing. Here’s how to find the right team for you and make it happen. Love the idea of… netball? According to Sport England , netball is the fastest growing female team sport with more than 150,000 women playing every week. It’s a great cardio workout and comes with a fantastic social side, too. If you’re new to netball, visit Back to Netball , where you can find your local training session by entering your postcode. Run by enthusiastic coaches, these sessions cover the basics of the sport and finish with a friendly match to put your skills into practice. Want to be part of a social league? Visit Go Mammoth to join a local team in one of 16 cities in England, Scotland and Wales. There’s a league for every level and it’s more fun and relaxed than competitive – usually ending with a drink in the pub or a hot cuppa! Want to get back into… hockey? Nearly 100,000 people in the UK are playing hockey on a regular basis and Back To Hockey via England Hockey is a great way to get back into the game. With coaches to guide you through the fun and friendly sessions, you can go at your own pace. Many sites hold their own socials and there’s often tea and cake after sessions. Interested in… football? With nearly three million active female players , football is the biggest women’s team sport in England and there are so many opportunities to get involved. Whether you’re interested in 5-a-side, friendly games or soccercise (getting fit with football), use The FA’s finder tool to find your local session. There are also opportunities for players with a disability to access football . Just want to have a kick-about with other women? Try FA Mars Just Play! , where you can turn up for an hour of exercise and fun, no commitment necessary. Want to start playing… rugby? The Rugby Football Union are working towards getting 25,000 more women and girls playing contact rugby as the national game shakes off its exclusively male image, and more and more clubs are creating women’s teams and fun sessions. Whether you want to try 15-a-side , sevens or touch , visit England Rugby, My Rugby to find your local club or even try a Warrior Camp . Starting in January 2018 in clubs across the country, the camps will introduce you to the basics of the sport. Based in Wales? Visit Welsh Rugby Union’s Try Our Game . They’ll match you to your local club for fun introductory sessions. And if you’re in Scotland, register your interest at Scottish Rugby, Be The Best You to discover free taster sessions. There’s also Try Tag Rugby , which has an amazing social community and is great for your cardio fitness. There are weeknight and weekend leagues on offer at locations across the country. How about… something different? Go Mammoth Go Mammoth is one of the biggest sport initiatives in the country and its goal is to share how group activity is the secret to fulfilment and happiness. As well as the most popular sports, you can also try cricket, basketball, dodgeball, rounders, volleyball or even ultimate frisbee. Player Wanted To join various sports teams including football and cricket across England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and the British Islands, visit Player Wanted to find your local team. Join In Fancy volunteering for a local sports team or event? Join In matches you up with local clubs that need your help, including youth games, rugby union clubs, disability athletics and cycle rides. Totally Sporty If you live in central or greater London, Totally Sporty can help match you up with an amazing range of sports teams and groups, including table tennis, water polo and lacrosse. What next? Use the hashtag #WomenInSport and tag @Vitality_UK to share your experience of team sport. Whether you’re joining a new team or have played for years, help inspire other women to take part. As a Vitality member, you could get up to 50% off a pair of sports shoes with Runners Need . Available with eligible health insurance , life insurance and investments plans. Log in to Member Zone for the details.