Working From Home: Setting Up A Healthy Home Office. Published: 5 May 2020 Working from home every day is now a reality for many of us, and we’re having to adjust to a new environment. Not everyone has an office set up at home – desks, desk chairs, a keyboard, mouse or our colleagues to go on a walk with and chat to. Sitting for a prolonged period isn’t great for our posture and as a result, unwanted neck, shoulder or lower back pain are common. It’s really important to take steps to keep yourself healthy and prevent pain. Check out our six top tips to keep your posture on point while working from home… Seated Desk posture – Try to keep your feet flat on the ground – Bend your knees at a 90-degree angle – Keep your back supported and straight with your head looking forward – The top of your screen should ideally be in line with your eyes and not higher – The NHS has more information on good posture. Learn more Standing desk posture – Alternate between sitting-standing if you can. This will help with good posture, burn more calories 1 and boost your productivity 2 – Slide a box under your laptop or monitor and work standing up for a little while – It’s also great way to keep moving. Get creative – Using things like books, pillows and cushions, adjust your workplace. – Place a cushion behind your back on the chair when sitting down – this should help to prevent back pain – Slide some books under your monitor if it’s too low – it’ll help to keep your neck and shoulders straight – If you have one, sit on a medicine ball. It’ll not only help with your posture but also improve your attention 3 and core strength 4 Avoid working on the sofa – Setting yourself up at a table, even if it’s in your kitchen or living room is the best option when working from home – Studies show that sofas, beds or other non- traditional work-settings can negatively affect your posture 5 – Plus separating spaces means when you come to relax in the evening, you have somewhere different to go to Move more – Moving is the best thing you can do for your posture – Set a timer to get up and move every hour. Do more steps at lunch and exercise frequently to include little bit of extra movement in your day – Aim for 7,000 – 12,500 steps a day if you can Stretch it out – Sitting for a long period in one place can cause some muscles to tighten up – Stretch every day for at least 10 minutes to help prevent cramps, aches, and pain later 6 – Explore some to help stretch out those tight sitting muscles here.