Work Out, Together: Resistance Training & Cooldown. After warming up and doing some cardio in Round 1 , now it’s time for resistance training and a cool down session. The resistance round This takes a full-body approach and uses simple compound movements to get as many major muscles working as possible SQUAT TO OVERHEAD REACH 1. Start with feet shoulder-width apart. Pull your tummy in towards your spine to ‘set’ your core and squat, keeping your back straight, knees over toes, lowering your bottom as close to the ground as you can. As you come up, reach your arms overhead so your whole body is extended. Hold full water bottles or hand weights, if you have them, to make it harder WALK OUT TO PLANK 2. Stand with feet hip-width apart, bend down so your hands touch the floor and ‘walk’ them out in front of you until you’re in a plank position. Hold for a couple of seconds and walk back, returning to stand. REVERSE LUNGE WITH A TWIST 3. Start with feet together, then lunge back with your right leg so that you’re in a split stance. Twist your upper body to the left, extending around as far as you can. Bring your leg back to standing and repeat on your left. Perform each movement for 60 seconds with a 30-second rest between each. Beginners should aim for two rounds, while intermediate and advanced should aim to complete up to four rounds. The cooldown Time to wind things down and stretch. Keep this part nice and simple, concentrating on flexibility and breathing STANDING TOE TOUCH 1. Stand straight, feet together and slowly roll down your spine until you touch your toes (or get hands flat to the ground, depending on how flexible you are). WALK OUT INTO COBRA 2. Stand straight and bend down, to walk hands out in front of you. Lower your body to the ground, then extend upper back and shoulders up off the ground, supporting your weight with forearms. Don’t overarch or hurt your lower back. KICK BACK INTO CHILD’S POSE 3. Kneel down and stretch your upper body forward so that your tummy rests on your knees. Stretch arms forward, turning your head to one side if more comfortable, and feel the release in your lower back. TWIST STRETCH 4. Lie on your back, bring one knee across your body and keep both shoulder blades down on the ground. Repeat on the other side. Each movement should be held for 30-45 seconds, focusing on deep breathing while in the stretch position. Don’t forget that you can earn Vitality points by working out at a partner gym, joining a parkrun, walking, running, cycling or swimming by using a linked activity tracking device.