Za’atar cauliflower steaks with tahini and pomegranate. This month, top chef and food writer Myles Williamson is giving us his brilliant BBQ recipes and tips. Serves : 6 side portions Prepare: 20 minutes, plus barbecue setup time Cook: 40 minutes Ingredients 2 Large cauliflowers 3 tbsp Za’atar 2 tbsp Extra virgin olive oil, plus an extra drizzle to serve 1 Lemon, zest and ½ juice 1 Pomegranate, deseeded (see how to deseed pomegranate ) Small bunch parsley, leaves roughly chopped Small bunch mint, leaves picked 3 tbsp Tahini 2 tbsp Orange blossom or other floral honey, to serve Method 1. Trim the bases from the cauliflowers and discard the larger outside the leaves (reserve the smaller ones). Slicing vertically through the top of the florets, cut out about 6-8 x 1.5cm steaks from the central part of both cauliflowers, then transfer to a larger baking tray. Roughly chop the excess cauliflower into small florets and then spread on another, smaller flat baking tray, with the reserved cauliflower leaves. In a small bowl, mix together the za’atar, olive oil, lemon zest and juice; season well. Carefully rub ⅔ over the steaks and toss the other ⅓ through the smaller florets; set aside until needed. 2. Set up your barbecue. If using charcoal, light your barbecue 30-40 minutes ahead of time, let the coals turn ashen and glowing, then bank them to one side. Preheat a covered gas barbecue with the burners set over the highest heat for 10 minutes to get it nice and hot. 3. Grill the cauliflower steaks on a medium-hot part of the barbecue, turning carefully every 5-10 minutes, until tender when tested with a knife and charred all over, about 30-40 minutes in total, depending on their size; you may need to move them to a cooler part of the barbecue from time to time to avoid them becoming too charred. Meanwhile, place the smaller baking tray of florets on a medium part of the barbecue, stirring occasionally for about 25-30 minutes, until charred and softened. 4. Serve the cauliflower steaks and florets on a large platter or board, scattering over the mint and parsley leaves, and pomegranate seeds, before drizzling with the tahini, floral honey and a splash more olive oil, if liked.