“I knew if I didn’t take control, I would spiral”. Just over 12 months ago, Jane Platts was overweight, grieving and hardly able to walk. After her 60th birthday, she decided to turn things around… My pat on the back Running a 5k and 10k Swimming 6.5k in the Thames Completing a 150,000ft tandem skydive Boosting my energy and confidence Joining parkrun “Until I lost both my parents, I’d been active all my life. I swam competitively and trained in lifesaving, eventually becoming a lifeguard – but then everything changed when my father died 15 years ago. My mother’s health deteriorated and she needed a lot of help, so I became her carer. I was still working as well, so that didn’t leave time for anything else. “Mum was diagnosed with lymphoma in 2013, and I nursed her at home until she died. In the following year it was so hard trying to get my life back on track – I wasn’t sleeping, I was depressed and I had problems with both of my Achilles tendons, which meant I was in so much pain I could hardly walk. I was also morbidly obese – and yet I still continued to comfort eat. As I approached 60, I knew that if I didn’t take control I’d head into a downward spiral, running the risk of some really serious health problems. New beginnings “The turning point was being diagnosed with sleep apnoea, and getting my CPAP machine. Getting proper restorative sleep completely changed my life. It gave me the energy to tackle all the other things I needed to, and I found a therapist to start working on my tendons. My first session was so painful she could hardly touch them, but they gradually improved, to the point where I’m now taking part in charity runs and thinking about training for a half marathon. “I also joined my local Virgin Active health club using my Vitality discount, and started swimming again. I began really slowly, swimming just a couple of times a week to gradually rekindle that passion for exercise I’d once had. I’d honestly forgotten how much pleasure I get out of it. Confidence booster “The last 12 months have been hard work, but I’m in such a better place now. A year ago, I didn’t even like looking at myself in the mirror. Now I’m happier, more energetic and more confident. I feel good about myself. On top of the charity races, I’ve done my first ever sea swim, I’ve swum 6.5k in the Thames, and I’ve completed a 15,000ft skydive. Joining my local parkrun has also been fantastic. I always come last, but everybody is so encouraging and inspiring that it really doesn’t matter.” The Vitality difference: The Vitality discounted gym membership at Virgin Active was a huge thing for me. It meant I could go swimming regularly and take part in a variety of classes, which has helped me to stay motivated. Getting a Fitbug has been such a great motivator too. I probably wouldn’t have bought it, but as it was cheaper through Vitality I took a chance and it’s become absolutely essential. I’m quite obsessive about it. The rewards are so simple and so effective.  Every time I go to my Virgin Active club, I get Vitality points which give me rewards for being active.