Dr. Greger's DVDs All Now in Streaming Video  NutritionFacts.org Before there was NutritionFacts.org, my work existed as a series of DVDs (and before that as VHS tapes!). Now that all of my work is available online for free, the DVDs just package nine weeks’ worth of upcoming videos onto one disk. This offers folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts. But the DVDs were only available as huge clunky downloads… until now. Volume 33 My new DVD is now available as streaming video, like Netflix, so you can start watching it immediately. In this new volume 33 DVD I have videos on natural treatments for arthritis, hypertension, and prostate cancer; the pros and cons of soy foods; milk and type 1 diabetes; the optimal daily vitamin C intake; and whether or not we should all be taking a daily aspirin to help ward off heart disease and cancer. The current batch of videos from volume 32 just ran out on NutritionFacts.org. So, starting tomorrow and running until January, I’ll roll out this new set. They will all eventually be available for free online, but if you don’t want to wait you can watch them all streaming right now . Checkout will be the same as before, but now you’ll be able to choose whether you want to download the new volume or stream it (or both!). Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume 33 DVD—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org: Club Soda for Stomach Pain and Constipation Sesame Seeds for Knee Osteoarthritis Gut Microbiome: Strike It Rich with Whole Grains Morning Sickness May Protect Mother and Child Why BPA Hasn’t Been Banned Food Synergy Parkinson’s Disease and the Uric Acid Sweet Spot Wakame Seaweed Salad May Lower Blood Pressure Salt of the Earth: Sodium and Plant-Based Diets Who Shouldn’t Eat Soy? Does Casein in Milk Trigger Type 1 Diabetes? Does Bovine Insulin in Milk Trigger Type 1 Diabetes? What is the Optimal Vitamin C intake? Ginger for Osteoarthritis Should We All Take Aspirin to Prevent Heart Disease? Should We All Take Aspirin to Prevent Cancer? Plants with Aspirin Aspirations Egg Industry Response to Choline and TMAO Chocolate and Stroke Risk Does Diet Soda Increase Stroke Risk as Much as Regular Soda? Preventing Prostate Cancer with Green Tea Treating Prostate Cancer with Green Tea The Role of Poultry Viruses in Human Cancers Would Taxing Unhealthy Foods Improve Public Health? Vitamin D for Asthma Vitamin D for Inflammatory Bowel Disease Evidence-Based Eating Order my new DVD as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads . DVD Subscription If you were a regular supporter, you’d be an aspirin expert by now, having already received the new DVD. New DVDs are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor. Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free, and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, or all three—your choice). If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 33 yet, please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better. Happy Birthday… to me It was my birthday last week! If you want to get me something special, the best thing I could ever ask for is to just continue to do this life-changing, life-saving work. If you support my mission to educate millions about evidence-based eating, you could make a tax-deductible Happy Birthday donation to my 501c3 nonprofit organization NutritionFacts.org using a credit card , Bitcoin , a direct PayPal link , transferring stock , or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913. Looking forward to another year on Earth trying to make it a healthier place. Share Your Story! When I talk to other lifestyle medicine docs and ask them what made them see the light, the rational part of my brain is hoping they’re going to say it was a data-driven decision based on the overwhelming science. But instead, it’s often just a single one of their patients finding out about it on their own, trying it out, and getting better. No matter how massive the mountain of evidence, our brains seem to be hardwired for storytelling. It was, after all, just one person—grandma Greger—that inspired me down my path. We get people sharing amazing stories of health transformation with us all the time, but I’ve always resisted posting them. Why showcase anecdotes when there are randomized controlled studies effectively proving the case? But now I’m realizing that testimonials function not so much as evidence but inspiration. As long as the hardcore evidence is there to back it up, before-and-after stories can serve as motivation for others in a way that all the graphs and charts in the world may not. I figure it can be a way of putting a face on all the numbers. So, for example, we just posted the story of Alecia’s husband , whom I met in Texas this past April (warning: tearjerker alert!). All those years he was just 3 days away…. Has evidence-based eating changed your life? If you would be willing to share your success with others, please fill out our new testimonials form and your story may end up being featured (with your permission of course). We Didn’t Have Hoodies… Until Now It’s been so great to see all the NutritionFacts.org t-shirts in the audience at my talks. It’s getting a little chilly for short-sleeve shirts, and so as a fundraiser, for a limited time only, we are offering NutritionFacts.org hoodies and hats. You can get one here: https://www.booster.com/Nutrition-facts from now until November 10 th . Volunteer Positions Update Do you live in the DC metro area? Our amazing online article retrieval team is able to download the vast majority of the papers I need for my research, but there are some obscure journals that require a visit to the National Library of Medicine in Bethesda Maryland (Medical Center subway stop). If some detective work at the largest medical library in the world sounds like your cup of of hibiscus tea, please email our Volunteer Coordinator. We also still really need more online article retrievers, wherever you live. We have an amazing team already, but we’ve slipped down to only grabbing about 1,400 papers a week when we really need to be collecting closer to 2,000 weekly to stay ahead of the game. Apply to help here . We also have a new set of volunteer openings . We are looking for volunteers to help write concise summaries of our 1,400+ subjects for display on NutritionFacts.org topics pages . This will help us with “search engine optimization” (improving our standings in online searches). Having a health or medical background would be a bonus, but is not necessary.  For more information and to apply to help out, head to our volunteer opportunities page . Calling for Outreach Grant Proposals Our purpose is research and education. I think we’ve excelled at the research part, but have fallen short on our education mission. It’s not enough to just make the science available; we have to get it out there. Through word-of-mouth we’re already reaching millions, but it keeps me up at night thinking about all the people out there who could benefit from this life-saving information but just haven’t been exposed to it. Yet. We constantly get requests for outreach resources: from printed leaflets and posters for doctor’s offices to ad campaigns and speaker trainings. But outreach has never been our strong suit; we’re too busy churning through the nutrition literature. We’ve never really engaged in a concerted outreach effort, but now we’re hoping to change that by outsourcing it. This all started with a generous NutritionFacts.org supporter stepping forward and offering to earmark donations to offer grants to like-minded groups to help disseminate my research. So if you’re involved in a 501c3 nonprofit organization that you think that might be able to help spread the word, fill out our new grant application. Live Q&A’s Every month now I’m doing Q&A’s live from my treadmill, and November 29th is the next one. Facebook Live : At noon ET November 29th go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 8pm ET November 29th go here to watch live and ask even more questions Hopefully between those two I can get all your questions answered—at least until next month! In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations: 2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers