Dr. Greger on Alcohol  NutritionFacts.org I recently took the stage at TEDxSedona to talk about Food as Medicine . Watch it here .  And if you missed my appearance on Live with Kelly and Ryan, you can still check it out here . New DVD covers acne, aloe, and alcohol My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. I’m really excited about this one. Lots of good juicy practical bits—like How to Access Research Articles for Free—on a huge variety of topics including new research on cocoa powder and alcohol that have changed my clinical practice recommendations. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now . You can also order it as a physical DVD on Amazon . Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org: Does Chocolate Cause Acne? Does Cocoa Powder Cause Acne? How Much Lead Is in Organic Chicken Soup (Bone Broth)? Is Aloe Effective for Blood Pressure, Inflammatory Bowel, Wound Healing and Burns? Apple Peels Put to the Test for Chronic Joint Pain Can Alcohol Cause Cancer? The Best Source of Resveratrol Is It Better to Drink Little Alcohol Than None at All? Do Any Benefits of Alcohol Outweigh the Risks? How to Prevent Alzheimer’s with Diet Heavy Metal Urine Testing and Chelation for Autism Are Avocados Good for You? Does Marijuana Cause Permanent Brain Damage in Teens? Does Marijuana Cause Permanent Brain Damage in Adults? Do Mobile Phones Affect Brain Function? The Risks of Shark Cartilage Supplements Shark Cartilage Supplements Put to the Test to Cure Cancer Should Women with Fibroids Avoid Soy? Do Natural and DIY Tea Tree Oil Cleaning Products Disinfect as Well as Bleach? Coconut Water for Athletic Performance vs. Sports Drinks Are Sports Drinks Safe and Effective? Best Food for Hay Fever (Seasonal Allergies) The Benefits of Kale and Cabbage for Cholesterol How to Access Research Articles for Free Sci-Hub Opens Up a World of Knowledge Benefits of Blueberries for Artery Function Order my new DVD on Amazon , or as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads . If you were a regular supporter, you’d be an alcohol expert by now, having already received a link to the new DVD or download. New DVDs are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor. Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, you should have already received this volume, but if not please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better. Get a Signed Bookplate Now is your chance to get a signed bookplate for your How Not to Die or How Not to Die Cookbook . Make a donation of any amount here and I will send you a signed bookplate. (Please note you must use the link to the form in the previous sentence in order to receive your bookplate.) One Day to Wellness Meet fitness industry icons Bruce and Mindy Mylrea. They are channeling all their energy, time, and talent into a new nonprofit organization they formed called One Day to Wellness to spread the good news that the vast majority of premature death and disability is preventable with a healthy diet and lifestyle. I’m taking most of this year off from traveling to write my next book, but they are launching a nationwide 100-city tour. Check out their schedule to see when they will be near you at http://onedaytowellness.org . Translated Captions In 2017, over 80 volunteers worked hard to translate NutritionFacts.org videos into 21 languages! To find out if a video has been translated into your language, simply click on the cogwheel on the bottom right of any video and then click “subtitles.” Live Q&A March 22 Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and March 22 is the day. Facebook Live : At 12:00 p.m. ET go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 1:00 p.m. ET go here to watch live and ask even more questions! You can access all of my past live Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at http://nutritionfacts.org/audio. In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations: 2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers