Dr. Greger on Mammograms  NutritionFacts.org Thank You for Your Support We just wrapped up our end-of-year donation drive. As you know, your contributions make NutritionFacts.org possible. Whether you donated or not, I appreciate your support in keeping evidence-based information alive. And speaking of getting evidence-based eating info out to millions, I’m honored to have been invited to be on ABC’s Live with Kelly and Ryan. Make sure to tune in on Thursday, January 11th ! New DVD Covers Mammograms + More Coconut Oil & Avocados My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. As you can see below, the main focus is on mammograms. Most women are just told what to do, rather than being given the facts necessary to make a fully informed decision. That’s why I decided to do a deep dive into the topic. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now . You can also order it as a physical DVD on DrGreger.org or Amazon . Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org: Coconut Oil and Abdominal Fat Benefits of Nutritional Yeast for Cancer Lead in Calcium Supplements 9 out of 10 Women Misinformed about Mammograms Mammogram Recommendations: Why the Conflicting Guidelines? Is Autism Really on the Rise? The Role of Pesticides and Pollution in Autism Should Women Get Mammograms Starting at Age 40? Do Mammograms Save Lives? Are Avocados Fattening? Consequences of False-Positive Mammogram Results Do Mammograms Hurt? The Role of Dairy and Gluten in Canker Sores Can Mammogram Radiation Cause Breast Cancer? Understanding the Mammogram Paradox Is Marijuana Addictive? Does Marijuana Cause Health Problems? Overtreatment of Stage 0 Breast Cancer DCIS Women Deserve to Know the Truth About Mammograms Do Cell Phones Lower Sperm Counts? Does Laptop Wi-Fi Lower Sperm Counts? Breast Cancer and the 5 Year Survival Rate Myth Why Mammograms Don’t Appear to Save Lives Why Patients Aren’t Informed About Mammograms The Pros and Cons of Mammograms Dining by Traffic Light Order my new DVD at DrGreger.org/collections/dvds or Amazon , or as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/ downloads . Become a Monthly Supporter If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a mammogram expert by now, having already received a link to the new DVD. New DVDs are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor. Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, you should have already received this volume, but if not please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better. Live Q&A January 25th Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and January 25 is the day. Facebook Live : At 7 :00 p.m. ET on January 25th go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 8 :00 p.m. ET on January 25th go here to watch live and ask even more questions! You can catch all of my past live YouTube Q&As here and Faceboook Q&As here . If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at http://nutritionfacts.org/ audio. In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations: 2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers