Final Fasting Webinar and New DVD  NutritionFacts.org I knew next to nothing about fasting until I did this deep dive into the medical literature for you. There are, by my count, 1,527 articles on fasting in English-language peer-reviewed scientific journals, and I read every single one of them… so you don’t have to! I’ve compiled all the best science into 41 videos which will drip out on NutritionFacts.org over the next few years, but for those who don’t want to wait, I am holding a series of webinars to go through them all at once and answer questions. The first webinar in July covered intermittent fasting, time-restricted feeding, and water-only fasting for weight loss. You can get the digital download here . The second webinar, Fasting for Disease Reversal, is coming up this weekend and while registration is already closed, the digital download will be available next week. UPDATE: Thanks to everyone who attended the webinar. If you missed it, the digital download is available here: https://drgreger.org/collections/downloads . The final webinar – Fasting and Cancer – will be October 25 at 2pm ET (my birthday!). In this session, I will focus on fasting for cancer as both an adjunct to chemotherapy and as a potential treatment in and of itself. I will also cover fasting for detoxing from chemical pollutants and pros and cons of using VSED—voluntarily stopping eating and drinking—to take control of the end of your life. Read more about it here . To join the October 25 webinar: Make a donation through this form and we will send you a link to register for the webinar as a donor reward ($30 is the suggested amount). Registration for the third and final webinar opens: September 19 and closes: midnight on October 18. New DVD covers intermittent fasting My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. As you can see below, the main focus is on intermittent fasting, with the first set of my 41 fasting videos. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now . Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org: The Effects of Hormones in Dairy Milk on Cancer The 3,500 Calorie per Pound Rule Is Wrong The Reason Weight Loss Plateaus When You Diet The New Calories per Pound of Weight Loss Rule Does Sugar Lead to Weight Gain? The Benefits of Calorie Restriction for Longevity Potential Pitfalls of Calorie Restriction For Flavonoid Benefits, Don’t Peel Apples Benefits of Fasting for Weight Loss Put to the Test Is Fasting Beneficial for Weight Loss? Is Fasting for Weight Loss Safe? Does Marijuana Cause Schizophrenia? Alternate-Day Intermittent Fasting Put to the Test Is Alternate-Day Intermittent Fasting Safe? Does Intermittent Fasting Increase Human Life Expectancy? The 5:2 Diet and the Fasting-Mimicking Diet Put to the Test Neurotoxicity Effects of Star Fruit Time-Restricted Eating Put to the Test The Benefits of Early Time-Restricted Eating Benefits of Flax Seeds for Inflammation Are Fortified Kids’ Breakfast Cereals Healthy or Just Candy? Are Pre-Cut Vegetables Just as Healthy? Benefits of Garlic Powder for Heart Disease Are Weight Loss Supplements Safe? Are Weight Loss Supplements Effective? Are BCAA (Branched Chain Amino Acids) Healthy? Order my new DVD as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads . And remember, if you watch the videos on NutritionFacts.org or YouTube, you can access captions in several different languages. To find yours, click on the settings wheel on the lower-right of the video and then “Subtitles/CC.” If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be an expert on these new topics by now, having already received a link to the new DVD. New DVDs and downloads are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor. Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, your copy is already on its way to you, if you do not have it already, please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better. Host a Screening of How Not to Die Over 15 successful How Not to Die Screening events have taken place around the world since launching this April. These events have brought communities together and have allowed this information to effectively reach wider audiences. Consider hosting a free event in your area: https://nutritionfacts.org/volunteer/screenings . Eating Guide Survey Have you used our Evidence-Based Eating Guide ? If so, please consider taking two minutes to complete our brief survey to help guide the future direction of our health resources. Keto Diet Theory Put to the Test