Follow-up Researcher Training, Upcoming CME, and The Big Fat Truth Reaching More People Than Ever Before A long time dream of mine is finally coming true! NutritionFacts.org will be partnering with the American College of Lifestyle Medicine to offer online courses for Continuing Medical Education credits. To maintain an active license, most medical professionals are required to stay on top of new developments by getting a certain number of hours of CME every year. And soon they’ll be able to fulfill part of that requirement by learning the latest in evidence-based nutrition! We’re working on the first course right now. but if your license is expiring and you can’t wait, the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine offers some wonderful (and free!) CME at NutritionCME.org Follow-Up Research Training One of the first CME courses we’ll be offering will be based on the research training webinar I hosted in early May. It was a huge success and I’m excited to announce that a 2-hour follow-up training will take place on Saturday, June 17th at 2pm ET . Go to NutritionFacts.org/webinar for more information and to register. Basically, I’m just going to be putting into practice all the stuff we learned in last month’s webinar to run practice searches on topics of your choosing. Submit your suggestions and vote on ideas proposed by others here . If you missed the 4-hour May 6th training, a recording is available along with the slides and notes. Our Growing Global Reach It’s been a whirlwind 18 months since How Not to Die was first released, and thanks to all of you, we’re still in the top 100 on Amazon’s best seller’s list with 1,000+ five star reviews. The book is reaching audiences across the globe and has already been translated into 16 different languages including Serbian, Swedish, French and Bulgarian, with many more on the way! I also want to remind everyone that we have more than 3,000 videos translated, covering 43 languages. For help accessing the translations, we have instructions here . To figure out what videos are in which language do a blank search on NutritionFacts.org and then choose your Video Translation Language . Mandarin Translators Wanted The latest official dietary guidelines in China call for cutting meat consumption in half in addition to restricting junk food, eggs, and dairy. Just in the last few months, we’ve gotten more than 100,000 new Chinese subscribers, and so it looks like the public might be taking the new recommendations to heart! We are working to share more of our videos on the popular video platforms Miaopai and Youku . Please consider applying here if you are fluent and able to translate in (Simplified) Mandarin. Coming Soon: The Big Fat Truth J.D. Roth , best known for his show The Biggest Loser, has created a new TV series called The Big Fat Truth. The series focuses on addressing the root causes of obesity, and how our diet can play a role in improving our overall health. I was honored to be featured as a guest on the show. The episodes that I’m in premiere June 18th and July 16th . For more info on the show and where to watch it, go here . And if you haven’t watched it yet, check out my appearance on the new show Prescription: Nutrition. You can watch the first episode here . This month I’m also taping my first PBS TV special based on How Not to Die . It will start airing this Fall—I can’t wait! Help Spread the Word Ever been in a situation where the subject of diet or disease came up and you wish there were a quick and easy way to help them cut through all the nonsense out there? You can help spread the message of dietary sanity with our outreach cards .  Share them with friends, colleagues, patients, or anyone else you think could benefit from life-saving nutritional science. They are available at cost here . Live Q&A Every month I do Q&As live from my treadmill and this month, Thursday, June 29th is the day: Facebook Live: At 2pm ET go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 1:30pm ET go here to watch live and ask even more questions! Have a super summer (or wonderful winter to all our southern hemispherians!). In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations: 2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers