Get a How Not to Die Cookbook Calendar & CME Credits #GivingTuesday Today is Giving Tuesday, kicking off the charitable season with a celebration of giving and philanthropy. To commemorate it this year, we’re offering a limited edition 2018 How Not to Die Cookbook Recipe Calendar, with each month featuring a 100% Green-Light recipe found in my new How Not to Die cookbook (available for pre-order here ). The first 200 people to donate $100 or more to keep the 501c3 nonprofit NutritionFacts.org thriving will get a calendar in time for the new year. Note: You must use this form in order to receive a calendar. My CME Course Now Available! It has long been a dream of mine to enable physicians to get Continuing Medical Education credits (which they need to remain licensed) for studying my work. Well, I’m so proud to announce that the American College of Lifestyle Medicine has come through for us. (Not a member? Join now !) A version of my research webinar is being offered for credit (“How to Be an Evidence-based Lifestyle Medicine Clinician”), along with a CME accredited version of the landmark documentary Forks Over Knives. I’m so honored to have among the first courses offered by ACLM, and I look forward to contributing a whole series of CME seminars. Visit http://www.LifestyleMed.education for details. Additional courses are scheduled to be unveiled on a continual basis throughout the coming year—I can’t wait! The How Not to Die Cookbook Did you see my cooking video concocting my new favorite beverage? If you missed it you can check it out here . There was such an overwhelmingly positive response I’m going to do another one—this time on my new favorite dessert! Stay tuned. I’ve just been bowled over by the response to the cookbook. The day pre-orders went live it rocketed up to the #7 best-selling book on Amazon! If you are going to use Amazon to order the cookbook or any other holiday gifts, consider using Amazon smile to support NutritionFacts.org. With your help, hopefully we’ll hit the New York Times Bestsellers list again! As always all the proceeds I get from the sales of all my books go to charity. I just want you and your family to be as informed and healthy as you can possibly be. Cookbook in German, Polish, and Dutch The first three countries to snatch up the How Not to Die Cookbook were Germany, Poland, and Holland. Hopefully it will also be picked up in the other 18 languages How Not to Die was published in, including Spanish. (The English language version of How Not to Die just went into its 17th printing!) In the meanwhile, don’t forget to share our new Spanish-language site with those who may be interested. Folks can sign up here to receive Spanish-language updates. Cannabis Webinar Videos Available Did you miss my recent webinar on the latest science of cannabis? You can order a download of all the videos here to catch up. My How Not to Die PBS Special My PBS special is rolling out across the country for their year-end pledge drives. To see if it’s playing in your area, go here and find your local station then click schedule and search for How Not to Die. Here are a few cities where I’ll actually be there live in-person: Monday, November 27th – CPTV in Connecticut 7pm Tuesday, November 28th – GPB in Georgia 7pm Wednesday, November 29th – Charlotte, NC  4pm Saturday, December 2nd – AETN in Arkansas 4pm Wednesday, December 6th – PBS SoCal in Los Angeles, CA 7pm Thursday, December 7th – WKNO in Memphis 7pm Live Q&A November 30th Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and Thursday, November 30th is the day. Facebook Live : At 12:00 p.m. ET Thursday, November 30th, go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 1:00 p.m. ET Thursday, November 30th go here to watch live and ask even more questions! You can catch all of my past live YouTube Q&As here and Faceboook Q&As here . If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at http://nutritionfacts.org/audio. In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations: 2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers