Get Your Signed Bookplates  NutritionFacts.org A signed bookplate makes a great keepsake for any of your copies of How Not to Diet , How Not to Die , or either of my cookbooks (see them all here ). Donate any amount using this form and we will send you a bookplate signed by me as a thank you gift. All proceeds go to keeping NutritionFacts.org growing and going! Donate today as this form will only be open while supplies last. How Not to Diet Out Now in Spanish How Not to Diet is now available in Spanish in hardcover and ebook editions on Amazon.es , Amazon.com.mx , and other online retailers. More information and the links for several stores can be found here . You can find the availability of all translations of all of my books here . And, if you prefer to get our newsletter in Spanish, just sign up here . Key Takeaways: Environment In honor of Earth Day, we are highlighting the relationship between what we eat and the environment this month. What role does our food play in climate change? Which diet has the least impact on the environment? Check out the topic page for information from microplastics to foods with the lowest carbon footprint. “Simply cutting down on the meat you eat to less than an ounce or two a day can dramatically reduce greenhouse gas emissions. In terms of land use, a more healthful diet, like a Mediterranean diet, may decrease your footprint by about a quarter, whereas even more plant-based diets can drop it by 50 percent or more.” (From Which Diets Have the Lowest Carbon Footprint? ) Recipe: Stuffed Sweet Potatoes with Balsamic Date Glaze I love sweet potatoes. They’re one of the healthiest foods on the planet and one of the tastiest, too. The purple ones are the best, and you can usually find them at Asian markets and specialty natural groceries. They’re so good and good for you that I usually send them out in the mail as holiday gifts! Get the recipe here , and watch how it’s made on our Reels video. Welcome, Tabitha! Tabitha joins us as our new Digital Outreach Assistant. With a business administration degree from Western Michigan University and an extensive marketing background, Tabitha works with our Digital Outreach Director to optimize and execute NutritionFacts.org ’s digital marketing campaigns and improve our SEO strategies. She balances these analytical projects with creative hobbies such as photography, reading, and writing. Originally from Michigan, Tabitha now lives in Atlanta where she enjoys hiking, golfing, and racquetball. Volunteer Spotlight: Patricia Penna I’ve been volunteering with NutritionFacts.org for almost four years. I started helping with video uploads and now help with blog uploads . NutritionFacts.org ‘s mission, empowering people with evidence-based information on the benefits of a whole food, plant-based diet, is what inspires me to support their work and help spread the word. I am happy to know that I contribute a bit to their amazing work. Favorite Recipe: I love this Veggie Mac & Cheese . It has my favorite foods: pasta, kale, a creamy cashew sauce, herbs, spices and tomatoes. Super easy, delicious, and nutritious. Flashback Friday: The Best Diet for Diabetes The case for using a plant-based diet to reduce the burden of diabetes has never been stronger. Do Angioplasty Heart Stent Procedures Work? There are demonstrably no benefits to the hundreds of thousands of angioplasty and stent procedures performed outside of an emergency setting. They don’t prevent heart attacks, enable you to live longer, or even help with symptoms any more than placebo (fake) surgery. Why Angioplasty Heart Stents Don’t Work Better Most heart attacks are caused by nonobstructive plaques that infiltrate the entire coronary artery tree. There is no such thing as “1-vessel disease,” “2-vessel disease,” or “left main disease.” Atherosclerotic plaque is continuous throughout the coronary arteries of heart attack victims. Next Live Q&A…TODAY! Every month, I do a live Q&A directly from my treadmill, and today, April 22 , is the day. Join on our Facebook page or YouTube channel at 3pm ET. I’ll be streaming to both at the same time. You can find links to past live Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, don’t forget I have an audio podcast to keep you company, too. And we just joined TikTok! Give us a follow ! In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations: 2019: Evidence-Based Weight Loss 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death