How to Survive a Pandemic Is Now Out in Paperback!  NutritionFacts.org My newest book, How to Survive a Pandemic , is now out in paperback! This book cuts through the prevailing noise and nonsense and reveals not only what we can do to protect ourselves and our loved ones during a pandemic, but also digs deeper into the roots of the problem and tackles the fundamental question: How can we stop the emergence of pandemic viruses in the first place? All proceeds I receive from the book are donated to pandemic prevention charities such as the The Good Food Institute and the Plant Based Foods Association . Order your copy today! New volume covers B12, fasting, & climate change My new volume is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org: Are Aluminum Pots, Bottles, and Foil Safe? Stainless Steel or Cast Iron: Which Cookware Is Best? Is Teflon Safe? Are Melamine Dishes and Polyamide Plastic Utensils Safe? The Best Diet for Weight Loss and Disease Prevention The Benefits of Fasting for Healing The World’s Largest Fasting Study Are There Health Benefits of Spending Time in Nature? Anti-Inflammatory Diet for Lupus Type 1 Diabetes Treatment: A Plant-Based Diet The Role of Epigenetics in the Obesity Epidemic How to Get the Weight-Loss Benefits of Ephedra Without the Risks The Effect of Drinking Water on Adrenal Hormones What Is the Safest Metabolism Booster? Optimizing Water Intake to Lose Weight The Effects of Marijuana on Car Accidents The Symptoms of Vitamin B12 Deficiency The Optimal Vitamin B12 Dosage for Adults The Healthiest Food Sources of Vitamin B12 The Optimal Vitamin B12 Dosage for Kids, Pregnancy, and Seniors The Best Type of Vitamin B12: Cyanocobalamin or Methylcobalamin? Hospitals Profit on Junk Food Win-Win Dietary Solutions to the Climate Crisis Which Foods Have the Lowest Carbon Footprint? Which Diets Have the Lowest Carbon Footprint? Are There Benefits of Pole Walking for Weight Loss? How to Reverse Heart Failure with Diet We have retired the volume DVDs, but all volumes are available for streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads . And remember, if you watch the videos on NutritionFacts.org or YouTube, you can access captions in several different languages. To find yours, click on the settings wheel on the lower-right of the video and then “Subtitles/CC.” If you are a $25+ monthly supporter and opted in to our donor rewards , you’d already be an expert on these new topics by now, having already received a complimentary link to the new download. If you’d like to receive them before they’re available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly supporter. Sign up on the donation page to become a $25+ monthly contributor and be given an opportunity to receive the newest downloads for free as long as your contributions are current. Join the Daily Dozen Digest My Daily Dozen Checklist was designed as a guide to inspire you to include some of the healthiest of healthy foods into your daily routine. To assist your healthy eating journey, we’re kicking off the Daily Dozen Digest, a free, 11-week email program with tips and information for each box of the checklist.