Last Few Days to Support My Work at NutritionFacts.org Thanks to your generosity, we have hit our goal! Without your support, I wouldn’t be able to spend my days digging into all of the best research and deliver it straight to you. NutritionFacts.org gets royalties from my books, but the number one funding stream that keeps us thriving is individual contributions from people like you. A huge thank you/gracias/cheers/xièxiè/dankie/merci from all our staff scattered across the globe in six countries. Thanks to the collective enthusiasm for sharing NutritionFacts.org by our 3 million subscribers and followers, we averaged 3.5 million page and almost 2 million video views per month this year. But it’s not about the numbers; it’s about the people whose lives we’ve touched, changed, or even saved. A heartfelt thank you to everyone who has made this public service possible. Please consider investing in my work by making a tax-deductible donation to NutritionFacts.org, using a credit card or PayPal , or you can send a check to: NutritionFacts.org, PO Box 11400, Takoma Park MD 20913 . Download the Free Evidence-Based Eating Guide As you get ready for 2021 and healthy resolutions, remember we have a free downloadable guide that summarizes my Traffic Light and Daily Dozen systems, as well as tips and simple recipes. Get your free download here , or order hard copies here at cost. How to Reverse Heart Failure with Diet Can you reverse heart disease with food? An entire issue of a cardiology journal dedicated to plant-based nutrition explores the role an evidence-based diet can play in the reversal of congestive heart failure. Flashback Friday: Chocolate and Stroke Risk Dark chocolate is pitted against milk chocolate in a test of artery function. Do Vitamin B12 Supplements Cause Bone Fractures and Lung Cancer? The connection between B12, bone health and cancer. What do randomized controlled trials of high-dose daily vitamin B12 supplementation show about the effects on cancer risk, death, and longevity? In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations: 2019: Evidence-Based Weight Loss 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death