Latest in Clinical Nutrition Volume 10 Now on DVD  NutritionFacts.org The current batch of videos from volume 9 are about to run out, so starting this week and running through October I’ll be rolling out the videos off my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD, volume 10. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share as gifts, but there’s nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up online free at NutritionFacts.org. The Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 10 DVD is available for purchase now (also on Amazon ). In addition, to commemorate my tenth volume, I’ve packaged all ten into a complete 12-disc DVD set that is also available (and on Amazon too). Here’s the list of chapters off the new volume 10 DVD — a preview of what’s to come here on NutritionFacts.org: Human Neurotransmitters in Plants The Wrong Way to Boost Serotonin A Better Way to Boost Serotonin The Best Way to Boost Serotonin The True Shelf-Life of Cooking Oils Black Versus English Walnuts Diet vs. Drugs for High Cholesterol Nuts & Bolts of Cholesterol Lowering How Fiber Lowers Cholesterol How Phytosterols Lower Cholesterol Optimal Phytosterol Dose Optimal Phytosterol Source Nuts & Obesity: The Weight of Evidence Solving the Mystery of the Missing Calories Testing the Pistachio Principle Testing the Dietary Compensation Theory Testing the Fat Burning Theory Fat Burning via Arginine Fat Burning via Flavonoids Fawning Over Flora Boosting Good Bacteria Without Probiotics Tipping Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes The Ice Diet Diet vs. Exercise for Weight Loss Meat & Weight Gain in the PANACEA Study Cattlemen’s Association Has Beef with Study Waist Circumference < Half Your Height Tightening the Bible Belt Biblical Daniel Fast Put to the Test Diet Pills Do a Fat Lot of Good To Snack or Not to Snack? Extra Virgin Olive Oil vs. Nuts Slimming the Gecko Engineering a Cure Ex Vivo Cancer Proliferation Bioassay Is It the Diet, the Exercise, or Both? Some Prostates are Larger Than Others Prostate vs. Plants Prostate vs. a Plant-Based Diet IGF-1 as One-Stop Cancer Shop Cancer-Proofing Mutation The Answer to the Pritikin Puzzle How Plant-Based to Lower IGF-1? Protein Intake & IGF-1 Production Higher Quality May Mean Higher Risk Animalistic Plant Proteins Too Much Soy May Neutralize Benefits How Much Soy Is Too Much? Plant-Based Bodybuilding Paleolithic Lessons Modern Meat Not Ahead Of The Game Filled Full Of Lead The Healthiest Meat Bug Appétit: Barriers To Entomophagy Eating Green To Prevent Cancer My last DVD , Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death, is already online in its entirety . It’s my attempt to squeeze all the most compelling (and entertaining!) findings published over the last 12 months on preventing, treating, and reversing our top 15 killers into a single video. If you find it valuable, please consider sharing it with those in your circles. Even if you’re not hooked into social media, you can click on the little envelope icon beneath the video to email it to friends and family (or just send them the link http://bit.ly/uprootingdeath ). And as always, if you haven’t already, you can subscribe to my free videos here . -Michael Greger, M.D.