Latest in Clinical Nutrition Volume 8 Now on DVD  NutritionFacts.org The current batch of videos from volume 7 are set to run out soon, and so starting next week, and running through May here on NutritionFacts.org, I’ll be rolling out the videos off my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD, volume 8. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share as gifts, but there’s nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up here for free at NutritionFacts.org. The Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 8 DVD is available for purchase now or through Amazon . Here’s the list of chapters off the new DVD, a preview of what’s to come on NutritionFacts.org: Is There Anything Kale Can’t Do? Smoking vs. Kale Smoking vs. Broccoli From Stem to Stern From Broccoli to Breast Liver Toxicity Due to Broccoli Juice? How Much Broccoli Is Too Much? The Best Detox Sometimes the Enzyme Myth Is True Have Broccoli, Won’t Travel Biggest Nutrition Bang for the Buck The Dangers of Broccoli? Raw Broccoli and Bladder Cancer Survival Breast Cancer Survival, Butterfat, and Chicken Breast Cancer Survival and Trans Fat Breast Cancer Survival and Lignan Intake Flax and Fecal Flora Breast Cancer Survival and Soy Coffee and Cancer What About the Caffeine? Vegetarians vs. Healthy Omnivores EPIC Findings on Lymphoma Dioxins, Viruses, or Antibiotics? Poultry and Penis Cancer Carcinogenic Retrovirus Found in Eggs Poultry Exposure and Neurological Disease Poultry and Paralysis Cross-contamination Risks Meat-borne Infection Risk from Shopping Carts A Treatment for Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Cholesterol and Female Sexual Dysfunction Cholesterol and Lower Back Pain Watermelon as Treatment for Erectile Dysfunction The Safer Cinnamon Raw Veggies vs. Cooked for Heart Disease The Fruit Whose Juice Is Healthier Preventing COPD with Diet Treating COPD with Diet Eating Healthy on the Cheap When Meat Can Be a Lifesaver Creatine Brain Fuel Supplementation Cheese Mites and Maggots Cow’s Milk-Induced Infant Apnea Cow’s Milk Casomorphin and Crib Death Cow’s Milk Casomorphin and Autism National Dairy Council on Acne and Milk Skim Milk and Acne The Acne-Promoting Effects of Milk Apples and Oranges: Dietary Diversity Garden Variety Anti-Inflammation Preventing Macular Degeneration with Diet How to See 27 Miles Farther Preventing Cataracts with Diet Getting to be a good time to start Spring cleaning our diets! -Michael Greger, M.D.