Limited-Time Summer Merch Is Here  NutritionFacts.org Show off your healthy lifestyle while supporting NutritionFacts.org. Our limited edition tee and tank are perfect for your summer activities, and all proceeds go to keeping NutritionFacts.org going and growing. Don’t wait to order, though. These items are only available until July 4. Get them here . Key Takeaways: Thyroid Health A butterfly-shaped gland found low on the front of the neck, the thyroid is part of the endocrine system, which is made up of glands that produce, store, and release hormones into the bloodstream. Thyroid hormones primarily influence our metabolism, growth, development, and body temperature. I recently did a webinar on iodine and thyroid function, and those videos are now all out on NutritionFacts.org. Watch them—and learn more about thyroid health— here . Recipe: Yellow Split Pea Dal with Watercress Dal is a staple in Indian cuisine and packed with rich spices. This bright meal is flavored with ginger, cumin, coriander, and turmeric. It is both warm and comforting, but light enough to be enjoyed all year round. Serve it over whole grains to check off several Daily Dozen items in one meal. You can find the recipe here , and a video on how it’s made here . Welcome, Dan and Nick! Dan and Nick recently joined our team and are responsible for day-to-day technical tasks, including development, maintenance, and administration of the NutritionFacts.org website to help bring you the latest in clinical nutrition. Dan has degrees in computer science and completed his doctoral research on machine learning, though his career has focused on web development. He has been a plant-based eater since 2016 and can often be found in the kitchen with his daughter, proving what is good for you tastes great, too. Dan lives in northern California with his wife, daughter, and two dogs. Nick is a full-stack web developer. When he’s not developing websites and web apps, he enjoys learning French, reading up on global politics, and animal rights activism. He spends most of his time between Florida and the United Kingdom. Vitamin D Infographic Is it necessary to take vitamin D supplements? Vitamin D is made mostly by animals, including ourselves, when we’re exposed to sunlight. Based on randomized, controlled studies, it may help us enjoy a healthier life. If you don’t get adequate sun exposure, I recommend 2,000 IU vitamin D supplements daily, ideally with the largest meal of the day. You can now get a summary of my vitamin D information in a printable, shareable infographic when you subscribe to our emails . Meghan’s Health Story I was diagnosed with stage 4 colon cancer at age 38. Genetic testing showed no predisposition, and my General Practitioner asked if that left me with more questions than answers. It did! I told her I had cut out red meat at the suggestion of my oncologist. She said, “That’s great! Keep going; in fact…cut out the white meat, dairy, and eggs.” Of course I asked, “What would I eat?!!” Then she asked me if I had heard of TMAO, and she wrote that down on a post-it, along with NutritionFacts.org . Watching the videos on TMAO and other topics really helped me. I saw that if my diet could do this to me, it could fix me too! I also read Dr. Greger’s book,