New Remote Job Openings at NutritionFacts.org  NutritionFacts.org Even as of this week, 20 months after publication, How Not to Die is in the top 50 best-sellers list on Amazon and back on the New York Times Bestsellers list. I figured the book would sell well at first. I’m honored to have so many people out there (like you!) who appreciate my work, and who themselves have friends and family they might want to keep around for a while. So I expected an initial surge in interest, but the fact that it’s now going into its 14th printing suggests it’s becoming more of a mainstream cultural phenomenon. So now I’m not just reaching the subset of NutritionFacts.org viewers that also like books, but reaching the masses who might never even find themselves on a nutrition website. That is why I have to write more books. I want to write one on optimal weight control (How Not to Diet), one on what to eat for maximum longevity (How Not to Age), one on eating to starve cancer, and one on diet and mental health. Each of those are monstrous research projects. (There are hundreds of thousands of papers on obesity alone, with about 100 new ones published every day.) To immerse myself in the research I’m going to need help with the website, hence these new positions: New Job Openings Are you interested in joining the NutritionFacts.org team? I need someone (or even better someone s —plural) to help research and write future video scripts. If you have a knack for finding, reading, and analyzing academic journal articles and are a skilled writer, consider applying here . Please note, though, the application process involves intensive days-long skills testing, so please carefully check the requirements to make sure you might be a good fit. New NutritionFacts.org Swag If you missed our previous Booster donation drives, we’re now offering NutritionFacts.org t-shirts (and soon tote bags) year round due to popular demand. Check out the new stuff here . All proceeds go to keep NutritionFacts.org alive and thriving. Balanced Launches Their First Campaign Balanced.org has just launched their first campaign to make cafeterias around the country healthier. They are asking Aramark, the largest US food service provider, to live up to its “Health for Life” initiative by not just switching from fried chicken to baked chicken, but considering something even healthier, like baked beans . You can take action and sign their petition here . For more about the campaign, check out their site . Audio and Video Podcasts If you’re looking for something to listen to while you’re on your morning run or driving home from work, don’t forget to subscribe to our podcast ! We also recently had to update our iTunes video feed so if you were subscribed to get NutritionFacts.org videos right to your iTunes account, you’ll need to resubscribe here . Live Q&A’s today! Every month I do Q&As live from my treadmill and this month, today (July 27th) is the day! Facebook Live : At 1:00pm ET today go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 3:00pm ET today go here to watch live and ask even more questions! You can sign up to receive notifications every time I go live on YouTube by “Ringing the Bell” next to the subscribe button on our YouTube channel . And you can also follow us on Pinterest to get Daily Dozen recipe ideas. In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations: 2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers