NutritionFacts.org Is Proud to Help Launch a New Organization Balanced New DVD, New Organization & Last Chance to Register for Research Training All the evidence in the world is worthless, unless it can be translated into action. I can research until I’m blue in the face (like the time I didn’t screw the blender tight and my blueberry smoothie went WHOOSH), but if there aren’t tools for people to put it into practice, lives will continue to be unnecessarily lost. It’s not enough to just make the science available. When I was a medical student I wished there was a resource like NutritionFacts.org. Commercialism has had such a corrupting influence on nutrition research it was hard to know what to believe. And who had the time to personally dig through the thousands of studies? There was desperate need for a science-based source to cut through all the confusion. And because it didn’t exist, I knew I’d just have to create it myself, and the rest is history. I feel the same way about Balanced. The second half of How Not to Die was one attempt to try to break down the research into actionable steps. I’m excited to announce that the free Dr. Greger’s Daily Dozen iPhone app should soon be updated with all the same bells and whistles as the Android app . So that’s another small tool. But we don’t have the luxury of changing lives one individual at a time. People are dying now . We need institutional change. The hospitals need to change what they’re serving, schools need to change what they’re serving, restaurants need to change what they’re serving. But there was no organization out there systematically affecting evidence-based nutrition on an institutional level… until now! One of the most common questions I hear from supporters is some variation of “OK, but what are you going to do about it?” I come out with some new video making a compelling case that large swaths of death and disability are preventable, or easily treatable, and they’re like quick, we have to do something! Meanwhile, I’m at the medical library buried under a mountain of papers working on the next video. To pivot from research to outreach would require a whole new staff, a whole new mission. I realized it would need a whole new organization. And if it didn’t exist, I knew we’d just have to help create it ourselves. So I’m so proud to announce that NutritionFacts.org has been instrumental in launching Balanced, a new nonprofit organization, run by an amazing educator, Audrey Sanchez. They have my full support. Please check them out at Balanced.org , join their mailing list, follow them on Facebook and on Twitter , support them directly, and strap yourself in for the evidence-based nutrition revolution!