Recipe for a Plant-Based Sweet Treat, New Volume, and Key Takeaways  NutritionFacts.org Eating a healthy, plant-based diet doesn’t mean depriving yourself of sweet treats! Dates are a great whole-food sweetener. Try them in these delicious Oatmeal Cookie Dough Bites. They come together easily in a food processor for a quick and simple sweet snack. Get the free recipe here , and check out our Instagram for a video on how they are made. Key Takeaways: Blood Pressure According to the renowned Global Burden of Disease Study, high blood pressure is the leading risk factor for death in the world by contributing to various causes of mortality. So, what can we do to keep our blood pressure down? Check out the topic page for a summary and videos like How Not to Die from High Blood Pressure and How to Lower Blood Pressure Naturally . Volume 57 Out Now My new volume of videos is out now. This collection includes an update on bovine leukemia virus and breast cancer, a series on longevity, potassium chloride as a salt substitute, and much more. Each video in this new volume will be released online over the next few months, available for free, of course, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch all of them by streaming right now . If you are a $25+ monthly supporter and opted in to our donor rewards , you’re likely already an expert on these new topics by now, since you already received a complimentary link to the new download. If you’d like early access to new videos before they’re available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly supporter . Without your generosity, we wouldn’t be able to continue our work. Thank you! Volunteer Translators Needed If you watch our videos on NutritionFacts.org or YouTube , you can access captions in several different languages by clicking on the settings wheel in the lower-right corner of the video. All of our videos are in English and have translated subtitles. They are viewed in nearly every country in the world! If you have a background in professional translation, please consider applying here . We are especially seeking translators for: Dutch, French, German, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, Simplified Chinese, Russian, Spanish, Tamil, and Vietnamese. Volunteer Spotlight: Xiaoju Zhang “I translate the videos and other content from English to Chinese. I enjoy working with the NutritionFacts.org team while learning healthy diet facts. I hope what we do here can help more people find their own paths to a healthy lifestyle. My favorite healthy food is tofu: The possibilities are unlimited!” Foods That Cause Inflammation Inflammatory markers can double within six hours of eating a pro-inflammatory meal. Which foods are the worst? Fighting the Ten Hallmarks of Cancer with Food The foundation of cancer prevention is plants, not pills. Flashback Friday: Dr. Greger’s Daily Dozen Checklist In my book How Not to Die , I center my recommendations around a Daily Dozen checklist of all the things I try to fit into my daily routine. In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations: 2019: Evidence-Based Weight Loss 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death