Recipe Testing and the Straight Dope  NutritionFacts.org Become a Recipe Tester Just a few months to go before the How Not to Die Cookbook comes out in December! Want a sneak peek at some of the recipes? The publisher printed up some 2018 How Not to Die Cookbook wall calendars featuring 12 recipes from the book (collector’s edition! :) and offered to mail them to the first 500 people who agree to make the recipes and share their creations on social media with the hashtag #HowNotToDie. Sign up here to be one of the first to get your hands on these all-Green-Light-ingredient recipes and help spread the word. The calendar is free, but you have to be among the first 500 to sign up so don’t delay! Note this offer is for US mailing addresses only. Dr. Greger’s Next 3-Hour Live Webinar In my nutrition work, I’m known for sifting through mountains of data in the context of massive conflicts of corrupting commercial interests to get at the truth. So it’s no wonder that people come to me asking about other divisive health topics. So once in a while I’ll cover controversial non-nutrition subjects like Should We All Get Colonoscopies Starting at Age 50? or fun topics like Laughter as Medicine or Music as Medicine . One of the most common questions I get is about the use of cannabis, both edible and smokable. Like in the field of nutrition, there’s gobs of internet misinformation floating around on all sides of the debate, and so I decided to take the topic on. I ended up making 20 videos on it, which I’ll dribble out at one a month or so on NutritionFacts.org. They’re all done now, though, and so for those interested in the topic I thought I’d put on a live webinar to share them all at once. So here’s your chance to cut through the haze and see what the science actually says. Here’s all the topics I’m going to cover in the 3 hour webinar: The Institute of Medicine Report on the Health Effects of Marijuana Researching the Health Effects of Marijuana Is Marijuana Addictive Does Marijuana Cause Health Problems? Does Marijuana Cause Permanent Brain Damage in Teens Does Marijuana Cause Permanent Brain Damage in Adults Will Big Cannabis Turn into Big Tobacco? Marijuana Legalization and the Opioid Epidemic Effects of Smoking Marijuana on the Lungs Smoking Marijuana vs. Using a Cannabis Vaporizer Does Marijuana Cause Lung Cancer? Can Cannabis Cure Cancer? Are Cannabis Edibles Safe? Pesticides in Marijuana The Effects of Marijuana on Fertility and Pregnancy Does Marijuana Cause Schizophrenia? Effects of Marijuana on Weight Gain and Bone Health The Effects of Marijuana on Car Accidents Does Marijuana Cause Strokes and Heart Attacks? Cannabis for Inflammatory Bowel Disease They will eventually all go up on NutritionFacts.org (the last is scheduled for November 2019) but if you don’t want to wait 2 years, you can get it all now by joining me in this live webinar to get all your questions answered. For more info on signing up, go here . If you, or anyone you know is addicted to marijuana, it is best to undergo treatment in a residential addiction treatment . This will not only prevent the patient from going into the jaws of death due to drugs, but also provide information on how to cope with the relapse. Free Webinar TODAY by Dr. Ostfeld Speaking of webinars, one of my favorite docs is giving a free webinar today at 2pm ET on “Bringing Plant-Based Nutrition into the Clinical Practice,” a must for any medical professionals or students out there who want to incorporate these powerful tools into your practice. And it’s free and open to the public, thanks to the American College of Lifestyle Medicine. Register for it here . Fall Booster Campaign Looking for a way to show your support of NutritionFacts.org this Fall? Check out our new baseball t-shirts, and tees and totes featuring our popular “Plants are the Best Medicine” design here . They’re only available for a limited time, though. The fundraiser ends October 5th. All proceeds go to keeping NutritionFacts.org alive and thriving. Welcome to the Team! Spanish is the second most common spoken language in the world, which is why we were so ecstatic to finally get the Spanish version of NutritionFacts.org up (just click on the Spanish toggle on the bottom of any page on the site or go to https://nutritionfacts.org/es/ ). The most common, though, is Mandarin. So we’re super-excited to announce the addition of our new Chinese Social Media Manager, Hailey Chang. This is your tax-deductible donations to NutritionFacts.org hard at work! Hailey currently lives in Hong Kong and will be focused on expanding our current social media platforms, Miaopai and YouKu , and creating a NutritionFacts.org presence on Weibo (kind of like China’s Twitter). Also, please welcome Dustin Kirkpatrick, our new Graphic Designer! You can read more about him on our Meet the Team page. We’re so excited to be constantly expanding our reach and it’s all thanks to your support! New Nutrition Mission Newsletter Sign up for our new Weekly Nutrition Mission newsletter to stay updated with easy, impactful tasks for anybody to do each week to support NutritionFacts.org and healthy eating. We hope this will help mobilize anybody who wants to help spread the good news about the tremendous power we have over our health destiny and longevity at the end of our forks. Next Live Q&A’s on October 19th Every month I do Q&As live from my treadmill and next month, October 19th is the day! Facebook Live : At 1:00pm ET Thursday, October 19th, go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 3:00pm ET Thursday, October 19th, go here to watch live and ask even more questions! Note you can  start listing your questions now so I’ll be sure to get to them. You can sign up to receive notifications every time I go live on YouTube by “Ringing the Bell” next to the subscribe button on our YouTube channel if you’re interested in more of the personal side of my work. In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations: 2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers