Thank You for Your Support!  NutritionFacts.org Thanks to your generosity we hit our 2019 fundraising goal! Without your support, I wouldn’t be able to spend my days digging into all of the best research and deliver it straight to you. NutritionFacts.org gets royalties from my books, but the number one funding stream that keeps us thriving is individual contributions from people like you. A huge thank you/gracias/cheers/xièxiè/dankie/merci from all our staff scattered across the globe in six countries. Thanks to the collective enthusiasm for sharing NutritionFacts.org by our 2 million subscribers and followers, we averaged 3.75 million page views a month this year. But it’s not about the numbers; it’s about the people whose lives we’ve touched, changed, or even saved. A heartfelt thank you to everyone who has made this public service possible. While we have hit our goal for 2019, your donations are always appreciated. If you’d still like to support my work, you can do so by making a tax-deductible donation to NutritionFacts.org — by using a credit card , Bitcoin , transferring stock , or by sending a check to: NutritionFacts.org PO Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913 How Not to Diet launched Thanks to all your pre-orders, How Not to Diet premiered at #2 on the New York Times Best Sellers list. So close! But frankly, I’m just happy it’s finally out so it can start helping people. One really exciting unique aspect is that all the thousands of citations are hyperlinked online to the original source, so you can scan a QR code in the book (or go directly here ), and then click to download the PDFs of all the studies and access all the original research yourself. And I was honored to be invited back onto Fox Business to discuss the book. You can watch the segment here . New DVD covers chronobiology, fasting, migraines, and more My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. I dive into the fascinating topic of chronobiology—the study of how our bodies’ rhythms are affected by the rhythms of nature. I’ve also got videos on ancient grains, garlic, high blood pressure, migraines, and overviews on the best foods and beverages. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now . Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org: Trailer for How Not to Diet: Dr. Greger’s Guide to Weight Loss Is Breakfast the Most Important Meal for Weight Loss? Is Skipping Breakfast Better for Weight Loss? The Effects of Hormones in Milk on Infertility in Women Chronobiology – How Circadian Rhythms Can Control Your Health and Weight Eat More Calories in the Morning to Lose Weight Benefits of Garlic for Fighting Cancer and the Common Cold Breakfast Like a King, Lunch Like a Prince, Dinner Like a Pauper Eat More Calories in the Morning Than the Evening Benefits of Grapes for Brain Health How Circadian Rhythms Affect Blood Sugar Levels How to Sync Your Central Circadian Clock to Your Peripheral Clocks Are Ancient Grains Healthier? The Metabolic Harms of Night Shifts and Irregular Meals Shedding Light on Shedding Weight Why People Gain Weight in the Fall Effects of Marijuana on Weight Gain and Bone Density The Recommended Daily Added Sugar Intake Is Vegan Food Always Healthy? Kids’ Breakfast Cereals as Nutritional Façade What the New Blood Pressure Range Guidelines Mean How to Lower Blood Pressure Naturally with Lifestyle Changes Fasting to Naturally Reverse High Blood Pressure Foods that Help Headache and Migraine Relief What Are the Best Beverages? What Are the Best Foods? Order my new DVD as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads . And remember, if you watch the videos on NutritionFacts.org or YouTube, you can access captions in several different languages. To find yours, click on the settings wheel on the lower-right of the video and then “Subtitles/CC.” New DVDs and downloads are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor. Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor can opt in to receive the next three digital downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor can opt in to receive the next six new digital downloads. We sure appreciate your amazing support and hope you enjoy these rewards for your generosity! Want to help doctors help patients? One of my heroes, Ted Barnett, MD, FACLM, is the founder and president of a non-profit called the Rochester Lifestyle Medicine Institute. They are rolling out an innovative program designed to help doctors get reimbursed for actually educating patients about evidence-based nutrition. The 15-Day Whole-Food Plant-Based Jumpstart is a medically supervised intervention designed to be run by doctors in their own offices. Please join me in supporting the national rollout of the program with a tax-deductible donation here . Live Q&As TODAY Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and Jan 23 is the day. Facebook Live : At 12:00 p.m. ET go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 1:00 p.m. ET go here to watch live and ask even more questions! You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at http://nutritionfacts.org/audio. In health, Michael Greger, M.D.