The How Not to Die Cookbook is Available for Preorder! Let’s Get Cooking The How Not to Die Cookbook is now ready for pre-order ! It is so beautifully designed it looks like it belongs more on your coffee table than on your kitchen counter, complete with more than 120 recipes for delicious meals, snacks, and beverages made with 100% green-light ingredients to help anyone eat their way to better health. It ships the first week of December, but the more pre-orders that are locked in before then, the greater the chances it will rocket on to the New York Times Bestseller list like last time. So to encourage pre-orders, I’m offering free signed, personalized bookplates you can stick in the cookbooks for everyone on your holiday gift list. To receive your bookplates, go here: https://nutritionfacts.org/bookplates . Note: this is limited to the first 2,000 pre-orders, and we have about 500 left at the time of this blog publishing. (Yeah, I know I eat an anti-inflammatory diet, but my writing hand can only handle so many! :) New DVD covers fibroids, oil pulling, microwaves My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. In this new volume, I cover eczema, canker sores, avocados, hot flashes and more. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now . Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org: Autism and Casein from Cow’s Milk Does A2 Milk Carry Less Autism Risk? Gluten-Free, Casein-Free Diets for Autism Put to the Test Are Autism Diet Benefits Just a Placebo Effect? Double Blind Clinical Trial of Diet for Autism Pros and Cons of Gluten-Free, Casein-Free Diets for Autism Topical Honey for Canker Sores Best Foods to Avoid for Eczema Exclusion Diets for Eczema Does Oil Pulling Help with Cancer? Oil Pulling Benefits for Plaque and Gingivitis Oil Pulling for Teeth Whitening and Bad Breath Tested The Risks of Oil Pulling Dr. Greger’s Daily Dozen Checklist Are Avocados Good for Your Cholesterol? Avocados Lower Small Dense LDL Cholesterol The Institute of Medicine Report on the Health Effects of Marijuana Researching the Health Effects of Marijuana Talcum Powder and Fibroids The Rise in Blood Lead Levels at Pregnancy and Menopause Should Pregnant Women Take Calcium Supplements to Lower Lead Levels? Soy Phytoestrogens for Menopause Hot Flashes How to Convert into an Equol Producer Best Food to Counter Stress-Induced Immune Suppression Are Microwaves Safe? The Effects of Radiation Leaking from Microwave Ovens Order my new DVD as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads , or through Amazon . If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a microwave oven expert by now, having already received a link to the new DVD. New DVDs are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor. Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, you should have already received this volume, but if not please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better. Bringing NutritionFacts.org to a Global Audience Don’t forget to share our new Spanish-language site with those who may be interested! Folks can sign up here to receive Spanish-language updates. We are also working to share our videos and content on the popular Chinese platforms Weibo, Miaopai, WeChat, and Youku. Please consider applying here if you are fluent and able to translate in (Simplified) Mandarin. Live Q&A November 30th Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and next month, Thursday, November 30th is the day. Facebook Live : At 12:00 p.m. ET Thursday, November 30th, go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 1:00 p.m. ET Thursday, November 30th go here to watch live and ask even more questions! You can catch all of my past live YouTube Q&As here and Facebook Q&As here . If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at http://nutritionfacts.org/audio . In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations: 2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers