105 lbs Down & I Feel the Best in My Entire Life My Plant-Based Journey to Ultimate Health - Center for Nutrition Studies It’s a common refrain: I was eating healthy but then I slipped back into old habits. But this time, I want to help encourage you to KEEP GOING. WFPB Family Healthy Food and Daily Inspirations is a page I have started to share recipes, inspiration, and success stories.Hopefully my story will inspire you or someone you love to make lasting changes toward health and wellness.I yo-yo dieted for many years and seemed to have amazing results when I ate well and exercised, but then I would completely fall off the wagon and go further in the wrong direction. Sound familiar? Eventually I weighed over 310 lbs.I am a married father of five beautiful, athletic daughters who are all under 12-years-old. My wife and I are both entrepreneurs and have a few successful businesses, and we are both on several paid and volunteer boards; giving back to the communities we live and work in is very important to us.Between 30+ cheerleading and volleyball practices or games a week plus the several meetings daily we have in between, to say we are busy would be an understatement. As a result, my health unfortunately took a back seat.After a health scare on May 13, 2019, I made a decision to take my health back! I had been slowly killing myself eating the Standard American Diet (SAD) and drinking alcohol moderately. I switched to a whole food, plant-based (WFPB) diet and haven’t looked back. I started at over 310 lbs and lost ‪100 lbs in 231 days‬, and I have NEVER felt this good or had this much energy in my entire life.I am still losing weight and feeling great.️ The key is I finally made my health and wellness one of my top priorities.I started my WFPB journey with juicing. After about a month, I added in a salad each night.Now I have huge smoothies in the morning, power bowls for lunch and dinner, and healthy snacks (fruits, veggies, nuts, and seeds) whenever I want throughout the day. I have not counted a single calorie and I am rarely stepping on the scale. I am working out (playing squash, doing HIIT training, and weightlifting) at least an hour a day. I have also quit drinking alcohol, which was only filled with empty calories and regret.I have a long road ahead, but I have fully embraced this lifestyle. The information I have been able to get at my fingertips has been phenomenal thanks to the many wonderful platforms and books available to us all. I can’t say enough good things about Food Matters TV, Forks Over Knives , Dr. T. Colin Campbell ( The China Study and more), The Game Changers, Hungry for Change , and many more. I have also started a Facebook page to share my journey to health. It has daily inspirations and recipes I have found that work for us and some we have personally created.One of the biggest struggles has been the planning and prepping of meals each week while keeping things interesting and fresh. We have found that a little preparation can go a long way. For example, we absolutely love power bowls, and we can easily customize them throughout the week, helping us add variety to our diet.What else? Well, my blood pressure is perfect, my bloodwork is amazing, I’m on ZERO prescriptions, my doctor is amazed at the changes, and I feel INCREDIBLE. I now have the energy I need for us to raise our daughters and still have energy and spark to keep the marriage strong. I am also proud to say I am being an active parent and am leading by example.I hope that reading about my journey has inspired you and that you take the leap to explore a WFPB lifestyle. I promise you that you have nothing to lose, except the weight.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.