3 Trees With Edible and Nutritious Leaves - Center for Nutrition Studies The Center for Nutrition Studies (CNS) and its authors are not foraging experts; CNS does not promote the consumption of specific wild foods in nature. This foraging series shows the abundance of food in the natural world. Please use caution when eating anything growing in nature.Thanks to extensive research, we know that diets without leafy greens lead to a host of negative outcomes. Whether you eat a whole food, plant-based (WFPB) or even a keto or paleo diet, chances are you agree that we need to eat greens in order to maintain optimal health. When we look at Dr. Greger’s Daily Dozen , we see a recommendation for one serving of cruciferous vegetables a day and two servings of other leafy greens. Yet some people lack access to healthy fresh greens, or at least they believe they do.What if I told you that there are trees that produce edible and palatable leaves, and that they are much more common than you think? You’d probably wonder, why doesn’t anyone know about this or talk about it? I wonder the same thing.One of the benefits of being a plant-based forager is that you can find cups and cups of greens growing in the wild in any given season. While chickweed ( Stellaria media ) gets me through the winter and early spring, the three trees listed below are able to provide an abundance of food when the leaves are on the trees; all we need to do is identify, pick, wash, and eat them.Chickweed is available all winter when trees have no leaves.While I am of course not suggesting people defoliate an entire tree, you can safely pick lower-hanging leaves. The tree will counter this by growing taller and growing leaves beyond your reach. Those who are concerned by foragers should note that a giraffe eats about 75 lbs of food from trees per day and rarely has to ask if eating leaves off those trees is sustainable. [1] It is really the foragers who maintain the trees, while those who are ignorant of their value cut them down . See this prime example from Piedmont Park, Atlanta, Georgia. Finally, eating leaves from trees might be more sustainable than eating kale from a garden. Trees provide shelter, they grow deep roots and provide food for many different types of animals. They can live for hundreds of years and oftentimes we don’t need to tend to them. Eating more from trees might just be the most sustainable thing we can do, and it could give us nutrition we have been sorely lacking.Here lies a 35-year-old mulberry tree cut down, likely because too much fruit was falling on the tennis court. The fruit was delicious and fed many humans and birds. Notice the fresh leaves popping up below where they girdled the tree.Foragers classify the edibility of tree leaves and needles in different ways. Some can be used medicinally, such as using pine needles to make tea. We wouldn’t call pine needles a source of leafy greens because they are not easy to eat. Other leaves are technically edible, like spring beech leaves or spring hackberry leaves, but they aren’t all that tasty. Just because you read that a tree has edible leaves does not mean that it can be eaten at any time of year and does not mean it should be eaten raw. Not all tree leaves are edible. As always, properly identify and confirm the edibility of a leaf before attempting to consume it. Finally, be sure to check the leaves for insects prior to consumption. I found a particularly interesting sassafras leaf, and I was glad I looked inside before eating it!A spicebush swallowtail caterpillar (Papilio troilus) on a sassafras leaf.The list below includes the three tree leaves that are in my opinion the tastiest in eastern North America. Two can be eaten year-round, and one is best harvested in the spring.