3-Day Whole Food, Plant-Based Meal Plan - Center for Nutrition Studies An increasing number of people are transitioning to a whole food, plant-based (WFPB) lifestyle as a way to improve their health and reduce the risk of chronic disease, but making the switch means rethinking the way meals are planned and prepared. A plant-based diet meal plan includes a wide variety of:What isn’t on the list? Meat (including poultry), fish, eggs, dairy products, oil and processed foods. Working toward eliminating these foods from your diet has a range of well-documented health benefits , some of which you can start seeing within just a few weeks!Although plant-based diets can be described as vegan because animal foods are absent, avoiding processed foods and oils takes the concept one step further. Known as a whole food, plant-based diet, this way of eating aims to include as many health-promoting foods as possible. For a more detailed breakdown of how and why to go the extra step and try a whole food, plant-based diet plan, see our comprehensive diet guide .Need some inspiration to jump-start your foray into a new lifestyle? This easy WFPB meal plan has some tasty recipes to whet your appetite. Each daily menu sets you up with breakfast, lunch, dinner, a snack and a “salad of the day.” There are tons of familiar flavors and some new surprises, so get ready to dive right in!Your first plant-based menu combines classic favorites with fresh, unique ideas. You’ll start off the day with a delicious twist on toast featuring sweet potatoes and blueberries, then move on to a creamy tomato soup that’s sure to invoke memories of childhood. And who can resist hearty lentil burgers for dinner? Make a big batch to store in the freezer for even easier meal planning.Bet you didn’t expect to be eating carrot cake and “tuna” salad on your second day of going plant-based! With a few adjustments, these delicious classics fit right into a whole food vegan meal plan. Today’s menu is made for a busy schedule, including “grab-and-go” salads in a jar to simplify your lunch plans. In the evening, you’ll enjoy a big bowl of “sushi” — just like the takeout you used to order, but much better for your body (and your wallet)!Comfort food, anyone? Day 3 kicks off with a warm, smoky mix of tofu and vegetables and cruises right on into lunch with a bountiful bowl that will put you in mind of your favorite burrito joint. When dinner rolls around, surprise your family by tossing millet-based “meatballs” with whole-grain noodles and a quick homemade sauce.This plant-based diet meal plan is a great place to start, but it’s only the beginning of an ongoing journey. By keeping things simple and focusing on whole, unprocessed foods , you’ll find it gets easier to plan your own menus and start putting together recipes tailored to your tastes.If you want a little more help with your transition, our 7-Day Plant-Based Kickstart plan goes beyond the menu to provide additional resources and daily motivation. Good luck!Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.