Alcohol 16 Reasons to Rethink Your Drink - Center for Nutrition Studies A recent study suggested a trend toward reduced fertility with high alcohol consumption, more than 14 drinks a week, though results were not statistically significant [ 1 ] . Other studies support this finding but others disagree [ 1 ] . Apart from fertility, excessive alcohol use is associated with high-risk sexual behaviors and STD transmission [ 2 ] , date rape and sexual assault [ 3 ] . Of course, alcohol consumption during pregnancy is a bad idea, being a cause of miscarriage [ 4 ] , fetal alcohol syndrome, alcohol-related neurodevelopmental disorder (ARND) and alcohol-related birth defects [ 5 ] .So drinking and pregnancy do not mix. I’m sure that’s not the most astonishing news you’ve heard today.Beyond fertility issues, alcohol intake has been linked to worse outcomes in numerous conditions, as follows:Many of these problems are common issues that people struggle with on a daily basis, ranging from annoyances to life threatening diagnoses. In addition to these issues, excessive alcohol use helps to cause a whole collection of serious injuries, including drunk driving accidents, falls, violent injuries, or drowning. 31% of traffic fatalities involve alcohol [ 13 ] . In all, it is estimated that almost 90,000 people will die from alcohol-related causes annually in the US [ 14 ] .But what about the benefits of alcohol we’ve all heard about? There is evidence that light or moderate drinking is significantly associated with a reduced risk of heart disease, ischemic stroke (the kind caused by a clot in the blood vessel), and diabetes [ 7 ] .And while I’ve listed a large, impressive list of health problems, many of these dangers are related to excessive alcohol use. But some are not. For example, there is no clear threshold below which alcohol consumption seems to be OK for certain cancers, and even one drink can affect heartburn or sleep.All doctors have seen plenty of tragedy caused by alcohol and treat many chronic issues like heartburn, obesity, and high blood pressure that may be related to alcohol. People commonly ask me about beverage choices, particularly alcohol. After reviewing some of the evidence, I suggest, if they don’t have a health problem listed here, that an occasional social outing with a drink or two is fine, but folks who find themselves drinking almost every day may be at high risk for promoting one of the problems above. High risk drinking is considered to be more than one drink daily for women (or 7 drinks weekly) and more than two drinks daily for men (or 14 drinks weekly). If, for whatever reason, someone is getting anywhere close to those levels of consumption, I strongly suggest they rethink their alcohol consumption.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.