Another Way to Flatten the COVID-19 Curve – Our Food Choices - Center for Nutrition Studies Government leaders are talking about social distancing and testing for COVID-19 as two strategies that will help flatten the curve and restart our economy. New commentary by T. Colin Campbell, PhD, offers a third way — strengthening our immune systems to fight the COVID-19 pandemic through a diet of whole, plant-based foods. The commentary, titled “Our Most Important Defense Against COVID-19: Finding Hope through Scientific Evidence,” was released by the nonprofit PlantPure Communities , where Dr. Campbell serves as an advisor. According to the commentary, consuming a diet of whole, plant-based foods (vegetables, fruits, whole grain cereals, legumes and nuts) does not mean people won’t get infected by the virus, but it should increase their defenses to avoid the worst effects from the infection, and in doing so, help to flatten the curve of hospitalizations.Many people across the country and the world are feeling vulnerable and are looking for ways to protect themselves and their families. Nutrition offers another path, but many find the prospect of eating plants to be daunting. The nonprofit PlantPure Communities (PPC) has developed a strategy to communicate Dr. Campbell’s empowering message through a free Global 10-Day Jumpstart Challenge – Restarting the Economy Through Nutrition, commencing May 10th .Read the full press release at PlantPureCommunities.org .The Global Jumpstart is aimed at helping people strengthen their immune systems to fight the COVID-19 pandemic through a diet of whole, plant-based foods (vegetables, fruits, whole grain cereals, legumes, nuts, and seeds).The Global Jumpstart will introduce people to the power of a plant-based diet using a seminar, cooking classes, daily emails, webinars, and other resources, all provided free of charge! The Jumpstart will kick off on Sunday, May 10th.Get info about the Global 10-Day Jumpstart Challenge!Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.