Bridging the Gap Between the Wellness Industry & Medical Field Using Plant-Based Nutrition - Center for Nutrition Studies For over a decade, I have had my finger on the pulse of the wellness scene and created healthy lifestyle programs for corporations, residential communities, schools, and families. I have seen numerous trendy workouts and fad diets come and go. Despite the availability of nutrition information and increased promotion and marketing devoted to wellness products, an increasing number of people are overweight and sick.The wealth of scientific evidence that supports the power of a whole food, plant-based diet cannot be denied. A plant-based diet can prevent, treat and reverse some of today’s leading causes of death including diabetes, heart disease, and high blood pressure. Having worked extensively with young children and families, I have seen first-hand the dangers of obesity and type 2 diabetes in today’s environment.This is what prompted me to enroll in the CNS and eCornell Plant-Based Nutrition Certificate program .At the same time I was ready to start a family and commit fully to a whole food, plant-based diet to ensure I was getting the best possible nutrition. I was amazed how my body responded. I had always kept fit and tried to make healthy food choices, but I had never experienced a level of energy and vitality like this before. I felt in the best shape of my life, and shortly after, I became pregnant with my son.Naturally, I began spending more time at doctors’ offices throughout my pregnancy. I received great medical care but was surprised by the lack of integration of lifestyle factors in my treatment and care. I had an ‘ ah-ha ’ moment when I saw so clearly the gap between the wellness space and our healthcare system. I began to envision a healthcare system that considered meditation as often as medication, taught food as medicine, and prioritized preventive measures. A healthcare system in which medical doctors, nutritionists, therapists, and health coaches work as a team to deliver the best possible care. One in which sleep, physical activity, and stress management are all part of the health equation. A place where our medical professionals help patients understand what it means to live a healthy lifestyle.I got to work, and soon after, I met Dr. Joel Sach, a board certified gastroenterologist who had recently undergone his own lifestyle transformation after personal health struggles. As a physician who has performed extensive research on mind-body medicine, he too realized that preventive wellness and lifestyle coaching were missing from his practice. Together, we delved into the study of Lifestyle Medicine. With our combined knowledge and training in the areas of medicine, gastroenterology, plant-based nutrition, yoga, mindfulness, meditation, and exercise we launched Vitality 360 Lifestyle Medicine.Plant-based nutrition is at the core of our programs, and it is already changing lives. We know the evidence supporting plant-based nutrition is compelling, but seeing the results first-hand is nothing short of astonishing. Patients report rapid and lasting weight loss, increased energy levels, deeper sleep than ever before, and improved blood sugar levels. Patients who suffered from joint pain, headaches, sleep apnea, snoring, and chronic digestive discomfort are no longer suffering.In this new practice our team emphasizes the role of nutrition and healthy lifestyle. Health coaching is offered to patients, and we work together as a team to bring a more holistic approach to healthcare.To any wellness professionals who have taken or are considering taking the Plant-Based Nutrition Certificate , there is a tremendous opportunity to help people who are struggling and utilize your knowledge to compliment a physician’s work. Food is medicine. The power of plants is strong, and we need more people spreading the message.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.