Cancer, Heart Disease, & Weight Loss A Plant-Based Diet Rescued My Health - Center for Nutrition Studies For nearly two years, my passionate faith in the benefits of a whole food, plant-based (WFPB) lifestyle has improved my response to my cancer, my history of heart disease, and my life in general. What I am about to tell you is neither an exaggeration nor a horror story. It is a celebration of the acquisition of a certain type of knowledge that has changed the course of my life. It is based on both personal and professional experience of disease observation born of well-earned time in some of America’s hospitals.In the summer of 2014, after watching Forks Over Knives for the third time, I attempted to adopt the WFPB lifestyle. I did so with some success but failed to stick with it for more than about six months. As a long-term cancer and heart attack survivor, I already had a somewhat weakened immune system. After a nearly 3,000-mile relocation the previous year to the Pacific Northwest, I began to develop some thickening of the bladder wall, appendicitis, and, for the first time in my life, severe weight gain. Not only had I reverted to the standard American diet, but I was overindulging in poultry, eggs, and cheese.Though I had formed a good relationship with a new cardiologist, my primary care physician was a highly experienced and clinically adept naturopathic doctor (ND). We had already successfully addressed a lung tumor through the use of powerful herbs and other natural means. Despite that success, due to some personal regression, by the end of 2018, I had suffered the consequences of not living in the healthiest way possible. I had also slowly but surely gained 20 lbs. Noticing blood in my urine coupled with the eventual inability to urinate, I reported to the hospital’s emergency department that December, where I was diagnosed with a serious urinary tract infection. Soon thereafter, I was diagnosed with urothelial carcinoma, a type of bladder cancer. I underwent an initial bladder resection in the early part of 2019. My urologist at the time recommended at least one round of intravesical chemotherapy upon discharge.When I was 23 years old, I had embryonal cell carcinoma, a rapidly spreading form of testicular cancer . I was treated at one of America’s foremost institutions for this disease. I underwent radical surgery and highly aggressive chemotherapy. In 2018, I declined the chemotherapy I was offered, as well as the alternative, Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG), a form of what conventional medicine refers to as “immunotherapy.” Because there is evidence that my previous chemotherapy treatments from 35 years ago caused my heart attacks [1] (I had two myocardial infarctions in 2008 within a 24-hour period, thanks to a periprocedural stenting that almost killed me on the table), my pre-diabetes