Center for Nutrition Studies Donates $1.5 Million to Highland Hospital for New Nutrition Research Program - Center for Nutrition Studies Highland Hospital in Rochester, NY will receive a $1.5 million donation from the T. Colin Campbell Center for Nutrition Studies for a new nutrition research program. Lead by Thomas M. Campbell II, M.D., and Erin Campbell, M.D., M.P.H., this significant research venture will focus on plant-based nutrition and will be part of Highland’s new Weight Management & Lifestyle Center.Initial research done through Highland’s Weight Management & Lifestyle Center will focus on nutrition and cancer. The pilot project will be a first-of-its-kind study that looks at the effects of plant-based nutrition in patients with advanced breast cancer, who are also receiving conventional therapy. The Center plans to do additional studies on nutrition as an intervention in a variety of diseases, partnering with experts in various specialties at the University of Rochester.“This funding and research will be crucial for patients and their families both here in Rochester and beyond,” said Cindy Becker, Vice President and COO of Highland Hospital. “We are both honored and excited that Highland can provide a home for these potentially groundbreaking studies.”The Highland Weight Management & Lifestyle Center is a new program that builds on the regional leadership of Highland Hospital in weight loss treatment. Its clinical programs are a commitment to helping patients live more vibrant, sustainable lifestyles through weight loss, good nutrition and taking care of the whole person.The T. Colin Campbell Center for Nutrition Studies is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization based in Ithaca, New York. The Center offers a variety of whole food, plant-based resources including a Plant-Based Nutrition Certificate powered by eCornell, hundreds of articles, recipes, educational videos, a healthy eating guide, monthly newsletter, and much more.Its founder, T. Colin Campbell, Ph.D., has been at the forefront of nutrition education and research for decades. Dr. Campbell’s expertise and scientific interests encompass relationships between diet and disease, particularly the causation of cancer. He and his son, Thomas M. Campbell II, M.D., co-authored the book “The China Study: Startling Implications for Diet, Weight Loss and Long-term Health.” A worldwide bestseller, the book has inspired a popular documentary and influenced millions of people to rethink their nutritional habits.To find out more, visit lifestylecenter.urmc.eduMedia Contact: Wendy Halik, Highland Public Relations Phone: (585) 341-9633 or 441-1917 (cell) E-mail: Wendy_Halik@urmc.rochester.eduCopyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.