Dairy Talks Season 1 - Why Olympic Athletes Are Ditching Dairy - Center for Nutrition Studies Everyone has their own reasons for ditching dairy. Hear from Switch4Good ’s core group of elite athletes and doctors about why they made the switch. Get inspired by 6-time Olympic medalist Rebecca Soni, pro soccer player Kara Lang Romero, triathlete Brendan Brazier , and other top athletes who excel on a dairy-free diet.More interested in research and numbers? Learn from Dr. Milton Mills and Dr. James Loomis (a former internist for NFL and MLB teams) about the detriments of dairy on one’s health in addition to the lifelong benefits of eating dairy-free.Dairy Myths Debunked by Critical Care Physician Dr. Milton Mills. Hear him cut through the noise to give us the hard science behind the dairy-free movement.Jennie Reed – Olympic Cyclist on Ditching Dairy for Better Performance Learn more about Jennie Reed’s inspiring story and why she doesn’t think athletes should be drinking cow’s milk. Seba Johnson – First Black Female Olympic Skier Didn’t Need Dairy to Make History Seba Johnson didn’t need dairy to make history as the first black female Olympic skier at the young age of 14. Vegan since birth, she is living proof that kids don’t need cow’s milk to grow up big and strong. Malachi Davis – Ditching Dairy Helped Olympic Sprinter Run Faster Hear the life-changing advice that his team’s nutritionist gave Malachi and how being dairy-free has served him in his performance and in his everyday life. Dr. James Loomis – Humans Don’t Need Dairy Milk to Be Healthy Dr. Jim Loomis is one of the world’s top experts on sports medicine. Hear his advice for anyone looking to improve their health and performance. Kara Lang – Olympic Soccer Player Says She Doesn’t Miss Dairy at All Learn about how dropping dairy helped transform Kara’s athletic performance, and why motherhood opened her eyes. Brendan Brazier – Ironman Triathlete Improved His Athletic Performance By Ditching Dairy Brendan Brazier stopped drinking cow’s milk and eating dairy products and immediately noticed a significant physical change and athletic improvement. Rebecca Soni – Why World Record Breaking Olympian Ditched Dairy Rebecca now advocates for a vegan lifestyle citing its impactful benefits on her mind, body and spirit. Dotsie Bausch – Olympic Cyclist Ditched Dairy & Switched to a Plant-Based Diet As a plant-based athlete, Bausch stood on top of the podium at the Olympic Games just five months shy of her 40th birthday, the oldest athlete ever in her discipline. Kendrick J. Farris – Why Olympic Weight Lifter Won’t Consume Dairy Kendrick credits his record-setting performance and control of his mood to his vegan lifestyle. Want more? Check out Dairy Talks Season 2 for a new wave of athlete stories and medical research. Get educated, be inspired, and make the switch for good! Course dates are approaching fast! Sign up today for the Plant-Based Nutrition Certificate . *This article is reprinted with permission from Switch4Good . You Might Also Like Plants Have All the Power We Need NFL & Olympic Nutritionist: How Food Affects... Whole Foods for Optimum Health Tags: Athletics Dairy Exercise Fitness Healthy Eating Interview Olympics Plant-Based Diet Sports Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.