Dr. T. Colin Campbell’s 8th Principle of Food and Health - Center for Nutrition Studies T. Colin Campbell, PhD, has been dedicated to the science of human health for more than 60 years. From this lifetime of work, he has developed eight principles of food and health.The following is an abbreviated excerpt from The China Study summarizing Principle #8.PRINCIPLE # 8 Good nutrition creates health in all areas of our existence. All parts are interconnected. The process of eating is perhaps the most intimate encounter we have with our world; it is a process in which what we eat becomes part of our body. But other experiences also are important, such as physical activity, emotional and mental health and the well-being of our environment. Incorporating these various spheres into our concept of health is important because they are all interconnected. Indeed, this is a holistic concept. Earn your plant-based nutrition certificate Learn more Furthermore, it turns out that if we eat the way that promotes the best health for ourselves, we promote the best health for the planet. By eating a whole foods, plant-based diet, we use less water, less land, fewer resources and produce less pollution and less suffering for our farm animals. Our food choices have an incredible impact not only on our metabolism, but also on the initiation, promotion and even reversal of disease, on our energy; on our physical activity, on our emotional and mental well-being and on our world environment. All of these seemingly separate spheres are intimately interconnected. *This was an abbreviated excerpt from The China Study (BenBella Books) by T. Colin Campbell, PhD and Thomas M. Campbell, MD. Read the rest of the 8 Principles: Eating Right: 8 Principles of Food and Health You Might Also Like Dr. T. Colin Campbell’s 1st Principle of Food and Health Eating Right: 8 Principles of Food and Health Reductionist Social Policy – What We Do To... Tags: Books The China Study Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.