Graduate Spotlight Allen Campbell - Center for Nutrition Studies Chef Allen Campbell is widely known as the “chef of peak performance.” His culinary philosophy focuses on taking care of one’s mind and body through exercise, stress relief, and a plant-based diet. He is the former personal chef for Tom Brady and Gisele Bundchen and the co-author with Tom Brady of the TB12 Nutrition Manual and coauthor of The Game of Eating Smart with Julie Loria. Avail ™ is his line of delicious and nourishing prepared foods. Chef Allen Campbell is a graduate of the CNS and eCornell Plant-Based Nutrition Certificate . Learn more about his latest projects on his website allencampbell.com . Follow him on Twitter and Instagram .At age 27, I began to open my eyes to the lifestyle I was living while working as a chef in the restaurant/hotel industry. At that point, I was not settling for becoming another statistic to diet related diseases like so many around me had. I’d lost a 51-year-old uncle to colon cancer around this time. He died at the same age as his father, my maternal grandfather, from the same disease. Heart disease, cancer, diabetes, diverticulosis, and so on are almost to be expected in a gene pool like mine. I wasn’t having it.I started gravitating towards people that were living a healthy lifestyle and educating myself on how our eating habits impact our health. I soon discovered that it is a plant-based lifestyle that makes the most sense for the body and our planet. Eleven years later, I’ve never looked back.For anyone that is just starting on this journey, I suggest gravitating towards like-minded people that you can lean on to gain motivation and knowledge. You’ve got to be willing to ask for help and allow those that are on this path to guide you. Whether it’s a social media channel/profile or science-based text, dive into all things plant-based until it sinks in.What I liked most about the Plant-Based Nutrition Certificate is that it laid out a great explanation of our current or mainstream medical paradigm while offering a solution that is actually based on health outcomes and not monetary profit.This certificate has helped me to reach my audience, personal clients and the public with a more refined message on health and the future of food. Bridging the gap between the food industry and the medical industry is vital if we are to have a significant effect on diet related disease and rising obesity rates.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.