Graduate Spotlight Marco Borges - Center for Nutrition Studies Marco Borges is an exercise physiologist, founder of 22 Days Nutrition , New York Times bestselling author, plant-based living advocate and environmentalist. Passionate about guiding people to develop healthier lifestyles, he has spent more than 20 years as a lifestyle coach and touring the world empowering others with tools for ultimate wellness. Marco is a graduate of the CNS & eCornell Plant-Based Nutrition Certificate program and author of The 22-Day Revolution, The 22-Day Revolution Cookbook, Power Moves as well as The GreenPrint (Introduction by Jay-Z and Beyoncé). He lives in Miami with his wife, their three sons and daughter.I have been fascinated with human performance my entire life. At an early age, I realized that we need to move to be optimally healthy, and shortly thereafter it became crystal clear that food played a very important role. However, it was years of research that pointed me in the direction of a plant-based diet and thus began my fascination with the lifestyle and mission to share it with as many as possible.The journey is quite simple if you see it as a beginning and not an end. What that means it that as you begin to lean towards plants, you realize that you’re empowering yourself with health and that it should be about progression, not perfection. The minute you see the journey as the end—of foods, snacks, fun, etc.—it becomes infinitely harder. Focus on what you’re gaining rather than what you’re giving up.The Plant-Based Nutrition Certificate validated what I had been sharing with my family and friends for years, and it provided credibility for many who questioned the movement they now believe is the healthiest way to live and thrive.The Plant-Based Nutrition Certificate is empowering many graduates with the tools they need to live their healthiest lives while sharing them with their family, friends, and community. This has created an elevated consciousness that inspires action and responsibility for the food we eat and where it comes from.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.