Have a Berry Happy Valentine’s Day With These 6 Plant-Based Recipes - Center for Nutrition Studies Want to enjoy a chocolate treat on Valentine’s Day yet remain whole food, plant-based? No worries! Try these delicious and decadent heart healthy recipes to celebrate love and friendship.Fabulous Chocolate Cupcakes With Mousse Frosting These fabulous chocolate cupcakes made with wholesome plant-based ingredients will satisfy your most devilish dessert cravings without taking a toll on your health or sending you straight into a sugar crash. Chocolate Obsession Oatmeal This cacao-rich oatmeal promises to satisfy anyone’s chocolate obsession. The dates lightly sweeten the oatmeal, and the chia seeds pack a punch of energy-boosting power. Chocolate Strawberry Brownies These delectable plant-based brownies are richly flavored with cocoa and fresh strawberries, and are oh-so-fudgy good. Cherry Swirl Smoothie Bowl Dark, sweet cherries are packed with vitamin C, potassium, and fiber and are kissed with the floral essence of rosewater in this sweet, swirly, nutritious smoothie bowl. Add cocoa for a cherry chocolate twist! Unbelievably Plant-Based Double Chocolate Cake This decadent cake is moist, fluffy, and melts in your mouth. Pair with creamy chocolate peanut butter frosting and fresh raspberries for the ultimate sweet treat. 4 Ingredient Chocolate Mousse This velvety chocolate mousse has only four ingredients and a fraction of the fat of traditional mousse yet is still a decadently delicious treat. You Might Also Like Sonoran Sunshine Retreat Speaker, Dr. Robert Maurer, on... 4 Plant-Based Recipes Bodybuilder Robert Cheeke Swears By How to Optimize Your Omega-3 to Omega-6 Ratio on a... Muscle, Testosterone, and a Plant-Based Diet The Connection Between Deadly Pandemics and Our Diets Live Longer, Live Better! Understanding the Research on... Sonoran Sunshine Retreat Keynote Speaker, Doctor Vanessa... Our New Whole Communities is off to a fast start.... The 10 Plant-Based Burger Recipes You Need to Try Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.