Home Composting Made Simple — Compost Guide With Tips for Beginners - Center for Nutrition Studies All Plants and Animals Die and DecomposeIn the natural world, all living beings upon dying are consumed by bacteria, insects, and other animals, yielding rich, black humus, where new plants grow, get consumed by creatures, eventually die, and the cycle of life continues.Problem of Sending Kitchen and Garden Waste to the LandfillUp to 60% of our landfill is yard waste, grass clippings, and kitchen refuse. Surrounded by inert materials such as cement, plastics, and metals, without air or water, organic waste has little chance to decompose, taking up valuable space for years.Why Compost?Composting at home turns our kitchen and garden waste into soil, avoiding the loss of precious organic resources. We can bury kitchen and yard waste in deep trenches or pile it up in a covered heap or inside a bin, then harvest rich humus in a few months.What Should Go in the Bin?Odds and ends of fruits and vegetables such as peels and pits, any plant refuse from the kitchen, and yard waste should go in the bin and will all render a rich, sweet-smelling compost. Add only the droppings of vegetable-eating animals to a pile hot enough to kill harmful bacteria.What Should Not Go in the Bin?Kitchen to BinPlace a bowl with a loose lid by the sink for vegetable refuse, fruit peels, coffee grounds, tea bags, egg shells (if you use eggs), and house plant clippings. A container that holds 4–8 cups is large enough, so you can walk it out to the bin once a day or every other day. Remember: no oil, cheese, pizza, meat, fish, or bones.Balance Your Compost MaterialsA healthy heap should have more dry browns (carbon) than greens (nitrogen) loosely layered. Keep the proportion about 2:1. Add a layer of dry matter to the greens once a week. Examples of browns are old corn husks, autumn leaves, or dry grass clippings. Examples of greens are all plant kitchen refuse, coffee grounds, house plant clippings, and freshly cut untreated grass. The heap needs moisture and air (two things absent inside heaps at the landfill). Add a little water if it gets too dry, and poke the heap with a stick to aerate it if it gets too compact.Tips and TroubleshootingBenefits of Composting and More InfoCopyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.