How to Build the Ultimate Plant-Based Burger - Center for Nutrition Studies Summer is here, and that means it’s time for outdoor grilling and picnic parties. Many of these parties will include burgers. There’s nothing quite like sandwiching a burger on a hearty bun with a few slices of fresh tomatoes and crisp lettuce.When you’re trying to adjust to a plant-based lifestyle, it can be challenging to navigate your place in the burger world. However, veggie burgers offer a variety of options in flavors, ingredients, and fun toppings. Here are some tips on how to build the ultimate veggie burger.Solution: Puree the mixture.If your veggie burgers fall apart when you try to grill them, it’s likely because the mixture isn’t pureed enough. Sometimes it’s nice to have chunks of brown rice, corn, or bell peppers in your burgers. However, once you bite into these patties, they often crumble apart, leaving you to scoop up the bits with a fork. Just as traditional meat burgers are ground a few times for a smooth mix, veggie burgers should also have a smooth texture.Chef’s Tip: Puree your bean, grain, or flavored veggie mixture using a food processor or blender until completely smooth.  If you want a little bit of color or texture, add no more than ¼ cup of bite-sized “bits” for every two cups of pureed burger mix. Corn, green beans, chopped olives, and chopped herbs all work great to add texture and color.Solution: Start with a dryer mixture.The veggie burger mixture should be dry enough that it holds together before baking or grilling.  If it’s too wet, you’ll have a soft, mushy burger. You can avoid this problem with a few easy tricks:1. Avoid Using Raw Vegetables They have too much moisture.  Cook ALL of the moisture out of your raw veggies (or at least as much as you can).  Not only does this help create a firmer burger, it also intensifies the flavor.2. Use a Binder3. Chill the Patties Let the burgers rest for at least 15 minutes in your fridge before cooking them. This helps the flavors meld together and it will help prevent crumbling burgers. If making the burgers ahead of time, you can bake them off, then freeze. From the freezer, toss them right on the grill or into the oven and cook until heated through.Solution: Add more flavor!Because you’re not relying on the fat in traditional meat burgers, you’ll need to have a heavier hand in using spices, herbs, and other flavoring ingredients. You can increase the flavor with some simple tricks:1. Add Spices Add spices like smoked paprika, chili powder, garlic powder, curry powder, and cumin when you sauté the vegetables for the patty mixture.2. Amp Up the Fresh Herbs Veggie burgers are a great way to use up lots of fresh herbs. Fresh basil, chives, cilantro, parsley, rosemary, and thyme all add lots of flavor. Use lots of one herb or mix them up.3. Add Acid, Heat, or Umami An extra “kick” can come from acid (like lime or lemon juice), spice (like chili paste or cayenne), or umami (like mushroom powder, nutritional yeast flakes, or soy sauce). Add a tablespoon or so to your burger mix.4. Let Them Sit Once you have your burger mix ready, shape the patties and then let them sit for 10 minutes before cooking.  This allows the flavors to come together more. If you throw them in the fridge, this will help them hold together before you put them on the grill or in the oven.Solution: Toppings, buns, and garnish!If you’ve mastered the veggie burger patty, it’s time to take your game to the next level. This is where the buns, toppings, and garnishes come in.  When you give as much attention to the toppings as you do to your patties, you are sure to make some impressive burgers.Delicious Spreads:Fun Garnishes:Beyond the Bun: Think beyond the typical wheat bun for holding your burgers. Sprouted English muffins, whole wheat pita bread, and Bibb lettuce cups offer some yummy alternatives.Create a Burger Bar: If you’re having a party, create a burger bar with a variety of buns, spreads, and garnishes.  Guests will love coming up with their own ultimate burger creations!Here are some delicious veggie burger recipes to get you started: Black Bean Burger Chickpea and Summer Squash Veggie Burger Quick and Easy Lentil Burgers Spicy Mushroom Burgers Super Green Gluten-Free Quinoa Sliders Lentil Potato Curry Patties Chickpea Garden Veggie Burgers Sweet Peanut Burgers Korean Red Beet Teriyaki Veggie BurgersBurger toppings: Mexicrema Dressing Speedy Two-Minute Ketchup Oil-Free Sun-Dried Tomato Pesto Oil-Free Hummus Spread 5 Minute Guacamole – Essential Vegan Recipe Low-fat Vegan Cheddar Cheese SauceCopyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.