Impact of Food Choices on the Environment - Center for Nutrition Studies It has been several years now since I recorded my lecture for the Plant-Based Nutrition course where I describe the connection between food choices and ocean health.  I have mixed feelings about what has happened in the intervening years since that lecture was recorded.  I have watched the oceans and planet in general continue to be degraded by many measures, but I have also watched with great satisfaction a growing public awareness of the connection between food choice and the environment.  In this article I present a long list of troubling trends concerning meat’s harmful impact on the global ocean and the earth environment in general and then try to persuade you to raise your voice for positive change.A US National Academy of Science report [ 1 ] designates nitrogen and phosphorous pollution as the main threat to US Coastal Waters.  Moreover, according to a recent EPA report 55% of all US streams are now unsuitable for aquatic life primarily due to excess nutrients. [ 2 ] The basic problem is that fertilizer runoff from corn production used primarily to feed livestock [ 3 ] and leaching from large manure ponds found at Concentrated Agricultures Feeding Operations (CAFOs) – better known as factory farms – enters local streams that eventually empty into the coastal environment.  Adding nutrients stimulates excess growth of phytoplankton (algae) that subsequently then die and sink to become available for bacteria to decompose in bottoms waters.  As bacteria decompose the dead phytoplankton they also consume oxygen.  Consequently, increasing nutrient additions indirectly leads to increases oxygen consumption by the bacteria until most or even all of the oxygen is removed from the water. With little or no oxygen in the water there can be no fish, no shrimp no marine mammals no marine life of any sort that needs oxygen to live.  These regions of little or no oxygen are referred to as dead zones. The spatial extent of the Gulf of Mexico dead zone has steadily grown larger over the past several decades with the largest dead zone ever observed occurring in 2012. [ 4 ] This is not just a United States problem. Dead zones are increasing in number and size worldwide. [ 5 ] The increase in dead zones is due to the dramatic increase in worldwide use of nitrogen fertilizer to grow ever more corn for livestock feed and for ethanol production. According to personal comments made by Professor Robert Howarth at Cornell University, we have put more nitrogen fertilizer on the ground in the past 15 years than all the fertilizer we have used since it was invented 100 years ago!Over the past several decades the business of commercial fishing has been transformed from familiar family-run operations to industrial fishing operations employing immense factory ships that are owned by large corporate holding companies that have little concern for conservation.  The result has been a 90% decline in the abundance of valuable top-predator fish species. [ 6 ] Moreover, 82% of all major world fisheries are now either fully exploited, over exploited or in recovery according to a 2010 United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) report. [ 7 ]There is also moral issue to consider with regard to overfishing. Industrial-scale fishing activities take away a basic food source for poor nations with coastal communities that have only small-scale fishing capabilities that cannot compensate for the greatly reduced fish abundances created by the industrial-scale fishing operations that are supported by developed nations.  I recommend you see the heart-wrenching National Geographic photo documentary titled Still Waters, The Global Fish Crisis which highlights this issue. [ 8 ]Fishing efforts also cause great environmental damage due to the accidental capture of non-target species – a process referred to as bycatch.  The extent of the problem is a function of the global scale of a fishing operations and the type of fishing methods employed.  In the case of bottom trawling for shrimp both the global scale and the methods employed lead to extremely horrific consequences. [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Bottom trawling is arguably the most destructive fishing methods in terms of bycatch, but long line [ 12 ] [ 13 ] fishing and the use of fish aggregating devices (FADS) [ 14 ] come with their own highly significant bycatch problems.With so much of the capture fishery under stress, or in decline, people have increasingly turned to aquaculture methods. Aquaculture operations have expanded dramatically over the past several decades and now account for 46% of all fish consumed worldwide [ 7 ] .  There are many harmful environmental impacts associated with aquaculture, but two major problems stand out.  First, there is the creation of hyper-eutrophic conditions in coastal areas hosting large aquaculture facilities with consequences analogous to the dead zones discussed above. Second, the need for farmed carnivorous fish species (e.g., salmon) to be fed fishmeal derived from wild-caught small forage fish (e.g. herring).  This has created a dramatic increase in fishing pressure on global forage fish stocks and risks imperiling other animals populations that naturally feed on these forage fish (e.g., seabirds, marine mammals and top-predator fish species). [ 15 ] [ 16 ]There is a fair amount of controversy surrounding livestock’s contribution to total annual greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.  An FAO report published in 2006 titled Livestock’s Long Shadow: Environmental Issues and Options [ 17 ] is generally a starting point for most discussions of livestock’s contributions to total GHG emissions.  The FAO report estimates that livestock contributes 18% to total annual GHG emission.  However, concerns have been raised about the GHG emission accounting methods used in the FAO report and about the independence of some of the authors of the FAO report that have affiliations with livestock groups.  Other groups have taken a broader accounting of GHG emissions that include contributions from land changes needed for livestock development, and this accounting approach places the overall contribution by livestock at 51%. [ 18 ] Robert Goodland provides a nice discussion in a New York Times article [ 19 ] of the back and forth on the issue of livestock contributes to GHG emissions and what many feel is FAO’s lowball estimate on livestock’s contribution GHG emissions. For a quantitative look at the issue see the article by Tara Garnett. [ 20 ]According to the World Wildlife Fund report [ 21 ] half of all the topsoil on earth has been lost over the past 150 years.  Time Magazine has a nice article on the topic of soil loss globally, and I must say it is not very encouraging. [ 22 ] According to the article, we have about 60 years of useful topsoil left if we keep doing business as usual.  The loss of soil is driven by many factors, but overgrazing by livestock is an important one.Global food security in the future faces the combined forces of a rapidly growing human population and global climate change that is predicted to decrease crop yields. [ 23 ] [ 24 ]