Is Stevia the Safest Sweetener - Center for Nutrition Studies Because it contains no calories and is derived from a natural source, stevia is often marketed as a healthier alternative to sugar and artificial sweeteners. Use of stevia in commercial products grew 31% between 2017 and 2018, [1] and the global market for the sweetener reached a value of $590 million in 2020. [2]Stevia now appears as a sugar replacement in everything from beverages to bread and is also sold as a non-caloric sweetener under brand names like Truvia and PureVia. But is it really a safe substitute for sugar? If so, does it have a place in a plant-based diet?Technically, stevia could be called “plant-based.” The sweetener is extracted from Stevia rebaudiana , a plant in the same family as chrysanthemums and, believe it or not, ragweed. [3] Its leaves contain sweet compounds called glycosides , which are typically extracted using one of two methods: Soaking the leaves in hot water, filtering the liquid, and crystalizing the compounds into dry sweetener. Using microorganisms to carry out a conversion reaction, referred to as bioconversion, which can create sweeter compounds. [4]Most commercial stevia sweeteners are made using hot water extraction, a process that can involve as many as 40 steps. [5] Bioconversion is more often used to produce less common glycosides that are just beginning to appear in mainstream products.Depending on the type of glycoside, the resulting extract can be anywhere from 100 to 300 times sweeter than sugar. Pure stevia extract has no fillers or preservatives and a negligible caloric content. Commercial sweeteners made from stevia may contain additional ingredients, including sugar alcohols and dextrose.The FDA has declared purified forms of stevia, listed on products as stevia extract or Reb A, to be “generally recognized as safe” (GRAS), and there is some evidence to suggest consuming stevia glycosides may have favorable effects. [6]When used as a functional or therapeutic ingredient, stevia may:It’s important to note many of these studies were conducted using stevia glycosides, not commercial stevia sweeteners, which may carry their own risks.The FDA didn’t grant stevia GRAS status until 2008; the sweetener had previously been banned from being marketed in 1987 and refused approval in 1991. Although an acceptable daily intake has been set at 4 milligrams per kilogram (about 270 milligrams for a 150 lb person), questions regarding stevia’s safety remain.One major concern in light of the current obesity epidemic is evidence suggesting that consuming non-caloric sweeteners like stevia in place of sugar could lead to higher caloric intake at subsequent meals. [14] The body appears to “make up for” the calories it expected to receive from sugar, negating any expected difference in caloric intake.Other potential dangers include:More research is needed to determine the extent and severity of these risks.Some people experience bloating, nausea, dizziness, muscle pain, and/or numbness [19] when they eat stevia. It may also prompt a reaction in people who are allergic to plants in the ragweed family.Stevia may cause unsafe reductions in blood pressure in people taking blood pressure medications, and consuming the sweetener in excess of acceptable levels during pregnancy can result in complications.Other side effects, including digestive discomfort, may result from the ingredients added to stevia sweeteners rather than from stevia itself.Due to these potential issues with stevia—and the fact that many stevia products are highly processed—the sweetener isn’t recommended as part of a whole food, plant-based diet .But you can still enjoy plenty of natural sweet treats! Try these tasty sugar replacements in your baked goods and snacks :Small amounts of maple syrup or blackstrap molasses also appear in some whole food, plant-based recipes and can be acceptable for occasional use.To satisfy your sweet tooth every day, you can’t go wrong with fruit. The sugars in fresh, frozen, and dried fruits don’t need to be extracted or processed and are generally well-tolerated by most people. So, instead of reaching for stevia as a sugar substitute, try tossing some raisins in your oatmeal, grabbing an apple for a snack, or adding some berries to your lunchtime salad.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.