Live Longer, Live Better! Understanding the Research on Longevity - Center for Nutrition Studies Most people want to live longer, but we don’t want to spend our later years in pain, on multiple medications, in the doctor’s office—or worse, the hospital! Unfortunately, that’s what often happens. With modern medical intervention, many are living longer just so that they can die longer.The good news is, we already know the key to healthy longevity. Scientific research shows us how to extend our lifespan and avoid the common diseases that plague so many Americans: heart disease, diabetes, obesity, cancer, Alzheimer’s, and more. According to the U.S. Burden of Disease Collaborators study, dietary risks are the number one cause of death and disability! [1] Avoiding dietary risk factors can therefore help us live longer and better.Let’s examine some of the science on longevity and then look at the people living in Blue Zones—regions of the world where people live longer than average—to see what we can learn from their lifestyle choices.Reduction of animal protein There’s an enzyme in our body called Target of Rapamycin (TOR) that regulates cellular growth and proliferation. You can think of it as our “engine of aging.” If we can slow down the activity of this enzyme, we can delay aging.How do we do this? Well, there was a substance discovered in a bacteria on Easter Island called Rapamycin [2] that does inhibit the enzyme activity. Unfortunately, it has numerous side effects, so we must take a different approach to reduce TOR activity: caloric restriction! This is probably not the fountain of youth pill you were hoping for, but the studies are encouraging. They show that limiting protein caloric intake can slow TOR activity. [3] And fortunately, plant protein does not escalate this aging!Blue Zones Blue Zones are regions of the world where people commonly live active lives to 90 years and beyond! [4] Five such regions have been identified: Okinawa, Japan; Sardinia, Italy; Loma Linda, California; Nicoya Peninsula, Costa Rica; and Ikaria, Greece. Note that they live active lives, not lives limited to frequent doctor’s visits and hospital beds. Their quality of life is high, even later in life.  How? A closer look at these populations shows that they have five common characteristics:In my presentation, “Live Longer, Live Better!” we will explore TOR, examine some of the other science related to slowing the aging process, and take a closer look at the people living in the Blue Zones to see what we can learn from their lifestyle. Join us to learn the recipe for a longer, healthier, and happier life!Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.