More Plants on the Plate - Center for Nutrition Studies Crispy, crunchy, colorful, and curiously delicious — all are words that describe a wide variety of vegetable, fruit, and whole-grain dishes. Research supports eating a variety of plant-based foods to promote health, but most people do not get enough of these nutrient-dense foods. Most plant-based foods are naturally low in calories and fat, but have high amounts of antioxidants and other healthful phytochemicals, as well as fiber.The abundant food supply in the United States provides almost 500 calories per person beyond what the average adult needs each day for growth, maintenance, and physical activity, according to 2008 estimates from the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The estimated number of calories needed by the average adult is 2,200 each day. The excessive number of calories available in the United States, compared to those needed, helps explain why the number of overweight children and overweight and obese adults is increasing.The Dietary Guidelines for Americans encourages increased consumption of plants — whole grains, fruits, vegetables, legumes, nuts, and seeds — and reduced consumption of solid and added fats, added sugars, and refined grains. However, people are not eating nearly as much plant food as is recommended. Data from 2008 show that, on average, people consume about half the recommended amount of fruits and vegetables daily.On the other hand, many people over-consume added sugars, getting around three times the amount recommended by the American Heart Association’s guidelines of 6 to 9 teaspoons per day.Don’t let a busy schedule keep you from choosing healthful foods. Instead, turn to a diet with more plants, one that is full of flavor and nutrients, low in calories, and very satisfying.Weight controlWeight gain is generally correlated with high daily calorie intake, and eating a small amount of nutrient-dense foods full of dietary fiber and complex carbohydrates. Fruits, vegetables, legumes, and whole-grain foods typically provide a feeling of fullness with fewer calories, compared to other types of foods. Putting more of these kinds of plants on the plate makes it easier to manage appetite and maintain body weight.High dietary fiberOnly plant foods contain fiber. Dietary fiber is a complex form of carbohydrate. Several decades of studies have confirmed the health benefits of eating a fiber-rich diet. Specifically, diets rich in foods containing fiber — such as fruits, vegetables, and whole grains — may reduce the risk of coronary heart disease and improve regularity. A healthy elimination system allows bodies to get rid of toxins. Beans and legumes contain more dietary fiber than almost any other food, so they are an integral and versatile part of a balanced diet. The dietary fiber in legumes is both soluble — which is especially useful in helping control cholesterol levels to lower heart disease risk — and insoluble — which improves regularity. Beans are also filling, so they help promote weight management by satisfying hunger.Chronic disease managementConsuming a diet featuring more plants is good for your health —today and tomorrow. Complex carbohydrates are easy to digest, and the antioxidants in plants help strengthen your body’s immune system. Dramatic results have occurred with the adoption of a more plant-based diet. Many people with heart disease, diabetes, cancer, and various autoimmune diseases have been able to alleviate their symptoms by eating more whole grains, fruits, vegetables, legumes, nuts, and seeds, and consuming fewer solid and added fats, added sugars, and refined grains.Q: Will I be able to get enough protein if I eat a more plant- based diet?A: A wide variety of plant-based foods provide protein. (See table below right.) Most Americans would benefit from eating more legumes, whole grains, nuts, and seeds, and eating fewer protein-rich foods containing saturated fats or added fats. A common misconception about dietary protein is that large amounts of it are needed for good health. The Institute of Medicine recommends 40 to 70 grams of protein each day, based on gender, age, body weight, and activity level. Almost everyone in the United States (except for some older adults) consumes enough protein, with most averaging about 75 grams per day.Q: Won’t eating carbohydrates found in plant foods make me fat?A: A diet rich in complex carbohydrates — such as fruits, vegetables, and grains prepared with minimal processing — is not “fattening.”Good Sources of Plant Protein