Muscle, Testosterone, and a Plant-Based Diet - Center for Nutrition Studies Testosterone regulates several functions in the body, including muscle growth, bone mass, fat distribution and red blood cell production. [1] It’s also instrumental in anabolism, the metabolic process in which complex molecules are built from simpler ones—including muscle fibers from proteins in the food you eat. Testosterone levels are therefore very important for maintaining or increasing muscle mass.Individuals focused on exercise performance and results can achieve optimal testosterone levels by eating well, but what exactly does that look like? Whether plant-based diets affect testosterone levels and muscle growth is a matter of ongoing debate.To build muscle, testosterone interacts with androgen receptors on cell surfaces and regulates gene expression. [2] The body responds by:It’s the perfect combination for a muscular physique as long as enough testosterone is available. Conventional “gym wisdom” suggests that eating a lot of animal protein is the best way to ensure optimal testosterone for muscle building, but plant-based foods can be just as powerful.Studies on how diet affects testosterone show that, although vegan men tend to have more of a testosterone-regulating compound called sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG), there are no significant differences in testosterone levels between omnivores and those on plant-based diets. [6]High-protein, low-carb diets are a different story: they appear to increase cortisol levels and decrease testosterone. [7] Switching to a plant-based diet can reverse this pattern and give testosterone levels a boost. [8]Optimizing testosterone on a plant-based diet But not all plant-based diets are created equal. Subsisting on plant-based meat analogs and vegan snacks isn’t the answer for healthy testosterone levels. A diet high in ultra-processed foods can actually reduce testosterone, [9] as can excessive exposure to BPA, a preservative present in many can linings and plastic packaging. [10]Whole and minimally processed plant foods, by contrast, are low in junk and high in nutrients. Some foods offer particular benefits that support testosterone: [11]Supplementing with vitamin D and vitamin B12 is also recommended to prevent deficiencies.One common concern about plant-based diets is that, despite being nutrient-dense, they don’t provide enough protein to build muscle. But studies show plant-based sources of protein support muscle growth just as well as animal foods. [12]Eating a plant-based diet may also increase your VO2 max, the amount of oxygen your body can use when exercising. [13] A higher VO2 max can improve performance during long or vigorous sessions. And because plant-based foods are anti-inflammatory, you may not need as much time to recover before your next workout. [14]Tips for building muscle with plant-based foods For best muscle-building results on a plant-based diet, balance is important—including eating enough protein. Strength training regimens require between 0.8 and 1.9 grams of protein per kilogram (about 0.36 to 0.86 grams per pound) per day— [15] that’s around 54 to 129 grams for a 150-pound person.Unless you’re an elite athlete or undergoing intense training, research shows no additional benefit from eating more. Going beyond what you need may cause health problems, including decreased testosterone. [16] The safe upper limit for protein appears to be 2 grams per kilogram (0.9 grams per pound) per day. [17]You should have no problem meeting your requirements if you:Tracking your macronutrients with an app like Chronometer can help you visualize how much protein you eat and adjust as needed. With healthy testosterone levels supported by a plant-based diet, your body can use these proteins—and the nutrients from other foods you eat—to build and maintain strong muscles.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.