Our New Whole Communities is off to a fast start. Here’s why you need to join. - Center for Nutrition Studies Are you passionate about the benefits of a whole food, plant-based (WFPB) diet? Do you ever wonder how best to educate others? Are you interested in regenerative farming and ecologically balanced food systems?What about food sovereignty? Would you like to advocate for the availability of healthy, affordable food for everyone?Whatever your area of interest, we’ve got you covered in Whole Communities , the online community set up by the T. Colin Campbell Center for Nutrition Studies (CNS).Whole Communities was organized following the Plant Forward Workshop Series that CNS delivered in 2021. The participants in those workshops had a great opportunity to get real insights into some of the amazing work being achieved by CNS’s Community Grant recipients. Many of them came away from the event feeling inspired, and they wanted to carry on the conversation and continue to connect with others. To meet that demand, Whole Communities was born!Our community is made up of people who are passionate about achieving optimal health through a WFPB lifestyle, but also want to join a resilient community that builds on the principles of that lifestyle. People from around the world are joining us. They are learning about plant-based nutrition, connecting with like-minded people near and far, exploring new concepts in our free resources and monthly workshops, and supporting others in the community who are discovering more about this lifestyle.For some people, the WFPB lifestyle is incredibly personal. We’ve heard the stories of life-changing, even life-saving, transformations that occur after going WFPB. Now, these same people are joining Whole Communities to share that passion with others, and to put it into action.As a moderator, I’ve had the pleasure of engaging with some of the 700+ members, and I continue to be inspired by their stories and work. I am so thankful to be part of such a supportive, positive community.“This community… has my back. If I get stuck in my intention or my ‘why,’ I know there is a wonderful group of like-minded humans who will inspire me, motivate me, and encourage me. I love the amazing resources, tools, workshops, meet ups, and all the learning opportunities that are available 24/7 and free of charge. But my favorite is the ‘chat’ feature. Someone is always present to share thoughts, to answer questions, and to direct you to the right resource.The welcoming warmth and brilliance of the leaders; the diverse, interesting and passionate members; the clear functionality of the site; and the community’s collective passion to save humans, animals and the planet sets WC apart from similar groups.”