Plant-Based Grilling Tips, Recipes, and Gear - Center for Nutrition Studies Grilling is a great way to add healthy, low-fat flavor to your cooking. The versatility of the grill means you can throw practically anything on it. Rather than the traditional burgers and hot dogs, why not try some sweet potatoes and corn on the cob? Check out these grilling essentials for healthy, plant-based cooking:Add fat-free chargrilled flavor to all of your veggies with a grill basket.  These are easy to use and easy to clean.How to Use a Grill Basket for Your Plant-Based Cooking:Use for: Zucchini, mushrooms, onions, summer squash, bell peppers, asparagus.Keep it separate! These grill baskets also help keep the plant-based foods separate from the burgers. Essential if you’re cooking for a crowd of mixed eaters…because not everyone wants meat drippings on their veggies.Chef’s Tip: You can also use these baskets for fruit. Add grilled flavor to peaches, plums, and even mangos by placing halved fruits into the basket and cooking over a medium-hot section of the grill. Toss with a teaspoon of vanilla extract or vegan cinnamon cashew cream just before serving.Chef’s Tip: Grill zucchini and summer squash. Toss with quinoa, rice, or any other cooked grain for an oil-free, plant-based, vegan grill saladHave you ever picked up a set of tongs on the grill and burned yourself on the steel handle?  Ever lost a few hairs on your arm while reaching over the hot flames of the grill?  You need a set of heat-safe tongs and spatula.These tongs are generally 14 inches, a bit longer than your regular indoor kitchen set.  The curved edge on the spatula makes it easy to maneuver around veggie burgers.  Heat-safe handles mean you won’t burn yourself if these sit too close to the flames…or too long in the sun.Chef’s Recipe : Grilled Potatoes With MarinadeKorean “Bulgogi” Marinade:Chef’s Tip: Grill corn and asparagus then toss with mixed greens and a drizzle of balsamic vinegar for an easy, delicious vegan summer salad.Chef’s Tip: Grill whole corn on the cob. Cut off the kernels and toss with sliced radish, 1 tsp chili powder, and the juice of 1 lime for a healthy, grilled plant-based salad.For the cost of 3 packs of wooden skewers, you can buy reusable, metal skewers that will last forever. Load these up with wedges of onions, whole mushrooms, and small cherry tomatoes for delicious, plant-based eating.  When you’re done?  Just toss them in the dishwasher for easy clean-up.Chef’s Recipe: Build-Your-Own FlatbreadChef’s Recipe: Pineapple Kebab Dessert BarTry one of these burger recipes:Black Bean Burger Quick and Easy Lentil Burgers Spicy Mushroom Burgers Chickpea and Summer Squash Veggie BurgerFor year-round grilling you can use a grill pan or a butane torch.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.