Preventing and Treating Erectile Dysfunction (ED) - Nutrition If you’re a guy interested in sexual intimacy and you happen to be a rabid health news follower, you might be eating lots and lots of blueberries and citrus fruits these days. That’s because increased fruit intake (particularly citrus fruits and blueberries) was recently reported to be associated with a reduced risk of erectile dysfunction ED.Researchers followed about 25 thousand men for 10 years, and found that those with the highest intake of fruit had a 14% reduced risk of reporting erectile dysfunction [ 1 ] . They found that flavonoids, a specific class of antioxidants rich in fruits and vegetables, were linked to reduced risk of ED [ 1 ] . This is supported by animal research showing that quercetin (a specific type of flavonoid) administration improves erection ‘firmness’ in diabetic rats [ 2 ] . Because I know you were concerned about erection pressures in diabetic rats.Given the recent good news about fruit and flavonoids, let me take this opportunity to highlight several important points regarding erections. They can be the source of endless middle school humor, but, as you’ll see, good erectile function is quite a serious matter.What do I take away from this? Think of the manliest scenes in American culture: downing meat, eggs, and protein to ‘bulk up’ or sitting in front of a TV with chicken wings and pizza, watching the game, or grilling a steak while pounding beers, . These ‘manly’ activities may actually be the exact opposite of what your penis needs to be functional over time.Instead, to prevent and treat erectile dysfunction, step away from the steak, hot dogs, and chicken wings and try some beans, fruit, and vegetables and get off your butt and get your heart rate up regularly. When we look beyond pop culture, and the dangerous stereotypes of masculinity, science tells us that those are actually the factors that make for the best sexual function over your lifetime.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.