Recovery From the COVID-19 Pandemic Testing, Tracing, & Nutrition - Center for Nutrition Studies Nonprofit group releases second part of urgent commentary from T. Colin Campbell, PhD regarding COVID-19 and nutrition.As the country struggles to find the right path to reopen our economy, it will be crucial to keep the rate of hospitalizations low – so that the hospital system is not overrun. Governors across the nation are now confronted with the conundrum of figuring out how to lift social distancing limitations without triggering a second wave of hospitalizations. What has so far been missing from the public dialogue is the potential of nutrition to help citizens defend against the worst effects of COVID-19, and thereby reduce strain on the hospital system. As pressure builds to reopen the economy even with the prospect of ongoing waves of the pandemic, this oversight will only get more glaring.The nonprofit PlantPure Communities (PPC) today released an important commentary from T. Colin Campbell, PhD, that offers a nutrition strategy that has promise in controlling the COVID-19 pandemic. This commentary is the second part of an April 3rd article which spoke to the revolutionary idea that people may be able to defend themselves against the worst effects of the infection through their food choices. In the commentary released today, Dr. Campbell makes the case that a low protein, whole food, plant-based (WFPB) diet, known to comprehensively prevent, and sometimes even reverse a broad range of chronic degenerative diseases, may act in a similar way to minimize viral diseases. According to Campbell, “the nutritional benefits of the WFPB diet are likely to appear, quickly, within days, e.g., lower serum cholesterol (LDL, total), reduced body weight, and decreased blood pressure. This could be especially significant for those currently vulnerable to COVID-19, but not yet infected.”Read the full press release at PlantPureCommunities.org .The nonprofit PlantPure Communities (PPC) has developed a strategy to communicate Dr. Campbell’s empowering message through the PPC Global 10-Day Jumpstart Challenge.The Global Jumpstart is aimed at helping people strengthen their immune systems to fight the COVID-19 pandemic through a diet of whole, plant-based foods (vegetables, fruits, whole grain cereals, legumes, nuts, and seeds).The Global Jumpstart will introduce people to the power of a plant-based diet using a seminar, cooking classes, daily emails, webinars, and other resources.Get info about the Global 10-Day Jumpstart Challenge!Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.