Reducing Food Waste Across the Supply Chain Statistics & Strategies - Center for Nutrition Studies Food waste isn’t a new problem, but recent events have highlighted its severity and the role it plays in the effort to create sustainable food systems. As impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic send ripples through the global supply chain, producers, retailers, and consumers are becoming more aware of the need to address wasteful practices .Food waste has wide-reaching effects from one end of the supply chain to the other:Waste early on in the supply chain—during production, processing, or transportation—is known as food loss , whereas food waste includes the food retailers and consumers throw away. [2] Regardless of where it occurs, the impact is nothing short of devastating.United States Food Waste by the NumbersBetween 30% and 40% of the entire US food supply is wasted every year. According to USDA Economic Research Service estimates, 31% of this loss occurs at the retailer or consumer level. [3] Another 40% occurs further up the supply chain, often resulting from: [4]Overall, Americans waste an average of 80 billion pounds of food per year, amounting to approximately $161 billion in monetary losses. [5]Global Food Waste StatisticsThe picture isn’t much brighter around the world. About one-third of all food produced for people is lost or wasted every year. Some of the biggest contributors to the problem include:Average annual loss and waste totals amount to 1.3 billion tons (2.6 trillion pounds) of consumable food. Total monetary losses equate to around $680 billion in industrialized countries and $310 billion in developing nations. [6]Addressing major causes of food loss and waste will require significant supply chain reforms and changes in consumer behaviors. Many initiatives are being developed and launched in the United States and around the world to support the following key focus areas.Increase awareness of…Provide education on…Shorten the food supply chain by…Bring food to the hungry with…Create new products using…Leverage technology to…By implementing new procedures and programs and taking advantage of technological advances, it should be possible to achieve the USDA’s proposed goal of a 50% reduction in nationwide food waste by 2030. Real change requires a combined effort between producers, distributors, retailers, and consumers to improve the supply chain and create an environment that supports a continued trend toward a society where food waste is a thing of the past.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.