Snowstorm Ready Soups - 4 Soup Recipes to Keep You Warm During hectic times of year when to-do lists are a mile long it’s easy to become overwhelmed, overscheduled, and overstressed. Making a pot of homemade soup can be the perfect antidote for our frazzled nerves. The process of making and sharing soup is good therapy for the senses.It begins with the quiet preparation and rhythmic chopping of vegetables, which can be calming and almost meditative. As we assemble ingredients, and flavors begin to combine and simmer, the aroma becomes welcoming and soothing. Once our soup is fully cooked and ready to serve, there is almost nothing that rivals the heartwarming pleasure of sharing the homemade nourishing goodness with a table full of loved ones.Staying one step ahead of the snow starts with a kitchen pantry full of staples. A variety of flavorful fundamentals will give you plenty of flexibility when it comes time to creating satisfying, nutritious soups.Stock up on pantry staples any time you see them on sale. Try to keep an assortment of these basics on hand, and you will be ready to make almost any favorite at a moment’s notice.Slow cooking a pot of soup all day long might be the easiest way to have soup on the table when you get home from a long day, but cooking a pot of soup on the stovetop is the fastest.These four tried and true recipes are among my favorites. Each one works beautifully with either method.The advantage of slow cooking becomes clear the moment you arrive home, when that pot of hearty bubbling soup awaits. But it’s a trade-off. For some households, the morning chaos is already at capacity, and adding even one more task to the morning routine (i.e., slow cooker set-up) doesn’t work for everyone.If this sounds like you, simmering any of these recipes on the stove after work is a great backup plan. Or, try to squeeze some time into your weekend to prepare one or two pots of soup for the cold week ahead, and cooking extra batches for the freezer can be a lifesaver on those too-tired-to-cook nights.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.