The T. Colin Campbell Center for Nutrition Studies’ Community Grant Program Is Pushing Plants Forward - Center for Nutrition Studies FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASEThe Center for Nutrition Studies awards Community Grants to support a diverse range of plant-based projects and nonprofit missions around the world.Ithaca, New York (September 20, 2021) – The T. Colin Campbell Center for Nutrition Studies (CNS) , renowned global leader in whole food, plant-based resources, education, and advocacy, has been successfully providing grants to support nonprofit organizations and projects around the world that are creating sustainable food-based initiatives. The Community Grants program empowers individuals and organizations to pursue and promote practical change in the areas of personal, communal, and ecological health.“We are incredibly excited to offer these Community Grants as a natural extension of our global mission,” commented LeAnne Campbell, PhD, President of CNS. “This grant program provides organizations with support to advocate for a more sustainable and equitable food system, whether they are nonprofit organizations, educators, community organizers, or environmentally conscious companies.”Beth Skidmore, MSACN, Board Chair of Rooted Santa Barbara County, an initiative dedicated to educating its community on the preventive power of whole food, plant-based nutrition, said, “We are incredibly grateful to receive this generous funding from the Center for Nutrition Studies’ Community Grant, which will allow us to help our county residents learn the basics of plant-based nutrition and food literacy and have fun and accessible tools to get started.”“We are very thankful to be the recipient of this grant,” said Erin Keyser, administrator of Jo Daviess Local Foods (JDLF) , an online farmers’ market that offers fresh produce delivery throughout Jo Daviess County. “One of our volunteers, Cindy Tegtmeyer of Galena, wrote the majority of the grant application. She is dedicated to bringing fresh, local produce to food pantries in Jo Daviess County. This will also benefit our local farmers, so it’s a win-win for everyone involved. We can’t wait to expand our Farm to Food Pantry program this summer and fall.”To help fund and support the Community Grants program, CNS is hosting an educational program for the public—the Plant Forward virtual workshop series—starting October 13th. All proceeds from the event will fund the Community Grants program. Participants will have access to:Attendees will come away with a deeper appreciation for how food choices impact the health of our bodies, our communities, and the planet; as well as strategies for making a positive difference.Learn more at plantforward.nutritionstudies.org .The T. Colin Campbell Center for Nutrition Studies (CNS) is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization committed to increasing awareness of the extraordinary impact that food has on the health of our bodies, our communities, and our planet. Through science-based education, service, and advocacy, we seek to inspire and connect all people, providing practical solutions to enable a healthier life, more equitable communities, and a sustainable world. We offer grants to empower individuals and organizations who are focused on increasing food literacy, improving access to healthy and affordable food, and building sustainable and equitable food systems. Our library of content and tools includes an online certificate in Plant-Based Nutrition, as well as articles, recipes, newsletters, and other free educational resources. Learn more at nutritionstudies.org .Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.