The T. Colin Campbell Center for Nutrition Studies Appoints LeAnne Campbell, PhD as President - Center for Nutrition Studies Center to Expand with New Service Division – Focused on Personal, Communal, and Ecological HealthThe T. Colin Campbell Center for Nutrition Studies (CNS), a not-for-profit organization committed to increasing awareness of the extraordinary impact that food has on the health of our bodies, our communities, and our planet, appoints LeAnne Campbell, PhD, as President. In this new role, Campbell will continue the Center’s goal of advocating for the benefits of a whole food, plant-based lifestyle.With over 30 years of experience working as an educator, teaching in a wide range of community settings and universities, Campbell has founded and directed several not-for-profit organizations, both abroad and in the states. Additionally, she is the author of The China Study Cookbook and the editor of The China Study All-Star Collection and The China Study Quick & Easy Cookbook .“We have been doing an amazing job educating and providing resources on whole food, plant-based living,” commented LeAnne Campbell, President at CNS. “Now we want to go one big step further and expand our efforts worldwide through a community service focus, promoting sustainable and equitable food systems.”CNS will begin to incorporate this vision immediately. As the daughter of T. Colin Campbell, PhD, coauthor of the bestselling book The China Study , this focus is very close to her heart. She currently lives in the mountains of the Dominican Republic where she directs the Global Roots Education Center. There, she directs and coordinates several education initiatives, partnering with US universities and high schools, allowing groups to explore the regenerative and resilient power of food.Perhaps more importantly, she models this in her daily life. She has been on a plant-based diet for over 30 years and raised two sons, now 26 and 25, on a plant-based diet. In addition, she produces close to 90% of her own food, growing over 85 different food items at her education center in the Dominican Republic. In the US, she’s building a home in Carrboro, NC, on a property that her son is developing into a permaculture farm. The ideals of food security, food sovereignty, access to healthy affordable food, and sustainable foods systems are a vital part of her life.As Campbell states, “I’m excited to share the potential of food and sustainability. We know a whole food, plant-based diet can help heal our bodies and when combined with a sustainable food system, it can also help heal our ecosystems. It’s a win-win situation that’s not only exciting but transformative.”About CNSThe T. Colin Campbell Center for Nutrition Studies (CNS) is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization committed to increasing awareness of the extraordinary impact that food has on the health of our bodies, our communities, and our planet. Through science-based education, service, and advocacy, we seek to inspire and connect all people, providing practical solutions to enable a healthier life, more equitable communities, and a sustainable world.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.