Top 10 Plant-Based News Stories and Articles of 2018 - Center for Nutrition Studies At the Center for Nutrition Studies we are excited to help spread the plant-based message with the world and we’re proud of the work we did this year to help people live healthier, happier, whole lives. Here’s a review of our top stories and articles of 2018.1)  6 Papers Redefining the Sciences of Nutrition, Cancer and Healthcare6 peer-reviewed science manuscripts from Dr. T. Colin Campbell were published concerning his suggested interpretation of the science of nutrition, especially its effect on cancer. The following article contains links to the publications.2)  Drinking Bone Broth – Is it Beneficial or Just a Fad?Many consider bone broth to be a miracle remedy but the science behind it just doesn’t add up.3)  How I Lost 120 lbs, Cured My Diabetes, & Avoided a Lung TransplantKate was given 2 to 5 years to live. She became plant-based and lost weight, restored her vision, cured her diabetes, and improved her overall health.4)  The Myth of Alkalizing Your BodyShould you alkalize your body or eat more alkaline foods for better health? What does ‘alkalizing your body’ even mean?5)  Smart Parent’s Guide to Why Kids Should Not Have Dairy ProductsWhy are parents so set on introducing dairy to their infants? Pediatricians have been taught that dairy is essential, but is it actually harmful to children’s health?6)  Research Confirms a Plant-Based Diet Can Help You Live LongerWill following a plant-based diet really help you live longer? The research says it does.7)  How I Stopped My Migraines & What I Wish I Had Known as a DoctorTransitioning to a whole food, plant-based diet put an end to my chronic migraine headaches.8)  Plant-Based Tips for Cooking Without OilLearn how to sauté, bake, roast, and fry without oil.9)  I Went Plant-Based, Lost 90 lbs & Became a Competitive RunnerA plant-based diet helped save my husband Tim’s life and helped my health in the process.10)  Eggs – New Heart Health Food? Or Rotten Reporting?A published study in 2018 had headlines across the globe proclaiming that egg consumption reduces the risk of heart disease but does the science hold up on closer examination?Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.