Top 10 Plant-Based News Stories and Articles of 2017 - Center for Nutrition Studies At the Center for Nutrition Studies we are excited to help spread the plant-based message with the world and we’re proud of the work we did this year to help people live healthier, happier, whole lives. Here’s a review of our top stories and articles of 2017.1) British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), Your Credibility Is TarnishedDr. T. Colin Campbell was featured in the BBC show, Horizon: Clean Eating the Dirty Truth under false pretenses. With clever interviews and editing the show became quite the controversy this year. The BBC even had to issue a response at the public outcry for how their show misrepresented Dr. Campbell and plant-based science.2) The Link Between Nutrition and Cancer Is Not New, Just IgnoredIn the 1980s while on sabbatical at Oxford University Dr. T. Colin Campbell researched and wrote a 60 page paper about the history of nutrition and cancer.  It was never published until recently in the prestigious journal, Nutrition and Cancer and is one of their most viewed articles ever. Four more papers have since followed and are open access for the public to read.3) Big Bang Theory’s Mayim Bialik Encourages Busy Families to Thrive, Plant-BasedActress Mayim Bialik is no rocket scientist, wait, she is actually a neuroscientist! She also happens to be a mom of two plant-based sons AND an author. This article features an excerpt from her latest book, Mayim’s Vegan Table , a vegan family cookbook.4) How Avoiding Statins Led to a Show Called The Big Fat TruthChrissy Roth’s high cholesterol led her to a plant-based diet. Her husband JD Roth, producer of The Biggest Loser , joined her in the plant-based lifestyle and now inspires others to go plant-based with his new show, The Big Fat Truth .5) Can the Ketogenic Diet Lead to Alzheimer’s Disease?The ketogenic (low carb) diet is still popular despite decades of scientific information about its detrimental effects on the brain. Husband and wife team, Drs. Dean & Ayesha Sherzai share their research on Alzheimer’s disease.6) The Plant Paradox by Steven Gundry MD– A CommentaryThe Plant Paradox , by Steven Gundry, MD, focuses on the surprising claim that lectins are the source of most, perhaps all human disease. Drs. T. Colin Campbell and Thomas Campbell respond to Dr. Gundry’s book. “To say that people are confused is an understatement and it is this confusion that invites scams like this book.”7) Plant-Based Diet Helps 21 Year Old Recover From Brain CancerBobby was diagnosed with brain cancer when he was 20 years old. After conventional treatment left him feeling sick and with lasting side effects, he discovered the power of a whole food, plant-based diet, and took control of his life.8) Doctor With MS Makes Film on Collapse of US HealthcareCompliant with modern medicine, Dr. Saray Stancic had fatigue, pain, and depression. Adopting a plant-based diet turned her life around and inspired her to begin work producing the film code blue: redefining the practice of medicine .9) From Hospice to Healthy: How a Plant-Based Diet Saved Mom’s Life and Inspired a BusinessMeg’s mother was being prepared for Hospice until she began eating a whole-food, plant-based diet.  Now at age 86 she swims four times a week, drives a car, and keeps getting better!10) Frustrations of Being a Plant-Based CardiologistDr. Jami Dulaney practiced traditional consultative cardiology until she began to add plant-based nutrition education to her practice. “The medicines and procedures I was taught are not the solution to regain health or reverse disease. They are stabilizers at best with potentially lethal side effects.” She now enjoys helping people take back control of their health.Copyright 2022 Center for Nutrition Studies. All rights reserved.