 Take the Daily Dozen Challenge Today we are launching a Daily Dozen Challenge to help more people discover how easy it is to fit some of the healthiest of healthy foods into their daily routine. I’m kicking it off by publicly challenging three of my friends and you to try to check off all the Daily Dozen servings for one day (based on my Daily Dozen checklist). Watch the kickoff video here. Then you challenge more people, and on and on, and soon lots of people will be eating healthy!  Join me by:  Accepting the challenge: Pick a day to eat the Daily Dozen, and then release your own public announcement asking others to do it. Posting a picture or video about your experience and tagging 3 more people to challenge them: Use the hashtags #HowNotToDie and #DailyDozenChallenge in your announcement post and ask others to do the same. Let people know they can track their Daily Dozen on our free iPhone and Android apps. You can challenge 3 people personally, or ask all of your friends! If you or your “challengees” are unable to complete the Daily Dozen challenge you can ask them to consider donating $12 to help spread this life-changing life-saving info to others.  If you don’t have it yet, my new cookbook has tons of green-light recipes to help reach the Daily Dozen (all of the proceeds from my books go to charity). My neat new video on The Daily Dozen is going live on NutritionFacts.org tomorrow, March 30th, but you can catch it early on our YouTube channel.    As we roll out this challenge, keep an eye on our social media pages where we will be doing contests for books, shirts, and even the beautiful Daily Dozen poster.      Get the App  Just in time for the Daily Dozen Challenge, we released our totally updated iPhone app! Those of you on Android have had all these nifty features, and now our iPhone users can check out the updates here, which include the option to track your progress over multiple days and enable a daily reminder to record your items. We are honored that the app was recently featured as an iTunes app-of-the-day, which you can read about here.   Now Hiring!  Thanks to an incredibly kind donation from John and Jeanne Esler, we’re excited to be able to open up a new position at NutritionFacts.org. We’re looking for an experienced Media and Events Director to enhance our global reach and manage my speaking tours. Job description and application are here.     Get Our Best-Selling Hoodie You’ve asked for it, and here it is: Our Plants Are the Best Medicine was a best-seller in our fundraising campaign last year, and now it’s available year-round in the store. As always, all proceeds go to keeping NutritionFacts.org alive and thriving.             Comments on USDA Dietary Guidelines  I’m excited to share this press release—hot off the press from the American College of Lifestyle Medicine. As a founding member and fellow of ACLM, I’m asking all NutritionFacts.org followers to join ACLM’s call for participation to help shape our U.S. Dietary Guidelines! The deadline to submit a comment is tomorrow, March 30th.   NutritionFacts.org en Español   Recuerda que NutritionFacts.org ya está disponible en español, ¡tenemos videos y blogs traducidos para ti gratuitamente! puedes visitarnos aquí.  Asegúrate de suscribirte a nuestro boletín para tener nuestros videos y blogs directamente en tu correo y síguenos en nuestras redes sociales:     Facebook: NutritionFactsEspanol Instagram: @nutritionfactsespanol Twitter: @NF_Espanol    One Night Only   Eating You Alive, the documentary which dramatically shows reversal of chronic disease, will be screened in approximately 600 theaters across the country for a one night special event on April 5th. This will be the largest theatrical exhibition of a plant-based film in history and we invite you to be a part of it.  See if it’s playing in your town: https://www.eatingyoualive.com/   Live Q&As   Every month I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and April 26th is the next one.  Facebook Live: At 1:00 p.m. ET April 26th, go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 2:00 p.m. ET April 26th go here to watch live and ask even more questions!   You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at http://nutritionfacts.org/audio. In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:  2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers   