 Whenever I’m speaking at events, people tell me these amazing stories about reinventing their health through evidence-based nutrition. Has healthy eating changed your life? Tell us your story here, and we may share it on our social media to help inspire others. Speaking of inspiration – the team at NutritionFacts.org was blown away by your great feedback about our new shirts. If you ordered one, we’d love to see how you’re wearing it and spreading the healthy lifestyle message with everyone who sees you! Tag @nutrition_facts_org or use the hashtag #nutritionfactsorg on Instagram so we can see your pics. New DVD covers macrobiotic diets, ginger, cheese, and more   My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. As you can see below, there’s a whole grab-bag of goodies, with new videos on cheese, coffee, ginger and macrobiotic diets. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now.  Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:  Aloe Vera for Psoriasis Dietary Supplements for Autism Urinary Tract Infections from Eating Chicken Bean Pastas and Lentil Sprouts Benefits of Blueberries for Mood and Mobility Does Adding Milk Block the Benefits of Coffee? Does Marijuana Cause Lung Cancer? Can Cannabis Cure Cancer? Best Food for Periodontal Disease and Gingivitis Pros and Cons of a Macrobiotic Diet Benefits of a Macrobiotic Diet for Diabetes Best Food for Late Pregnancy Best Food for Labor and Delivery Do Cell Phones Cause Salivary Gland Tumors? Benefits of Ginger for Obesity and Fatty Liver Disease Are There Risks to Energy Drinks? Are There Benefits of Energy Drinks? Are Acid Blocking Drugs Safe? The Best Diet for Upset Stomach Benzoyl Peroxide vs. Tea Tree Oil for Acne Can Saunas Detoxify Lead from the Body? Best Brain Foods: Berries and Nuts Put to the Test Best Brain Foods: Greens and Beets Put to the Test Is Cheese Really Bad for You? Is Cheese Healthy? Compared to What? How the Dairy Industry Designs Misleading Studies  Order my new DVD as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads. And remember, if you watch the videos on NutritionFacts.org or YouTube, you can access captions in several different languages. To find yours, click on the settings wheel on the lower-right of the video and then “Subtitles/CC.”     If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be an expert on all these new topics by now, having already received a link to the new DVD. New DVDs and downloads are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.  Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, your copy is already on its way to you. If you do not have it by August 26, please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better. Calling all Hindi Translators We are looking for volunteers with experience in English-Hindi translation as we bring the latest research on evidence-based nutrition to more people in India! We are also taking applications for more Hebrew and Mandarin translators. Apply today and help us spread the word.     Now on Apple News  There’s now one more place you can find life-changing content—right on your iPhone. I’m excited to announce that we’re now publishing blogs five days a week on Apple News. Just search for NutritionFacts.org, then tap the heart to follow and get the articles in your news feed.       Live Q&A Sept 27 Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and the next one is Sept 27. Facebook Live: At 12:00 p.m. ET go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 1:00 p.m. ET go here to watch live and ask even more questions!  You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at http://nutritionfacts.org/audio. In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:  2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers   