 The newest volume of my Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD series is now out. Order on my website or through Amazon (all proceeds go to the 501c3 nonprofit charity that keeps NutritionFacts.org up and running). It can also now be ordered as a video download. The last batch of videos from volume 16 just ran out, so running through March I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 17. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts, but there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works—more than 30 hours of video–I have a special on my complete DVD collection (also via download). Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 17 DVD – a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:  Should We Take a Multivitamin? Is Fish Oil Just Snake Oil? Norovirus Food Poisoning from Pesticides Foster Farms Responds to Chicken Salmonella Outbreaks Chicken Salmonella Thanks to Meat Industry Lawsuit  Who Determines if Food Additives Are Safe?  How Much Exercise to Sustain Weight Loss? Who Says Eggs Aren’t Healthy or Safe? Orange Aromatherapy for Anxiety Food Antioxidants and Cancer Food Antioxidants, Stroke, and Heart Disease Is Liquid Smoke Flavoring Carcinogenic? Is Meat Glue Safe? How to Slow Brain Aging by Two Years Alkylphenol Endocrine Disruptors and Allergies Dietary Sources of Alkylphenol Endocrine Disruptors Seeing Red No. 3 – Coloring to Dye For Back to Our Roots – Curry and Cancer Carcinogen Blocking Effects of Turmeric Curcumin Turmeric Curcumin Reprogramming Cancer Cell Death Nuts May Help Prevent Death Low Carb Diets and Coronary Blood Flow Phytates for the Prevention of Cancer Phytates for Rehabilitating Cancer Cells Phytates for the Treatment of Cancer Fully Consensual Heart Disease Treatment  Order my new DVD at DrGreger.org/dvds or as video downloads at DrGreger.org/downloads. All the proceeds from DVD, download, and book sales go to keep NutritionFacts.org alive and kicking. DVD Subscription On January 13, 2014, NutritionFacts.org hit another major milestone–20 million pageviews since the site launched in 2011. Thanks to all of our supporters, millions of people have gotten their recommended daily allowance of dietary sanity. If you’d like to chip in, you can make a tax-deductible donation using a credit card, through Paypal, or by sending a check made out to “NutritionFacts.org” to P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913. If you were a regular supporter, you could be watching the new DVD right now! I’m now coming out with new DVDs every nine weeks or so. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, consider becoming a monthly donor.   I hope everyone’e healthy New Year’s resolutions are still going strong! -Michael Greger, M.D.  