 My new DVD starts streaming today  My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. In this new volume, I take on guacamole and explore the best foods for autism, fibroids, lowering cholesterol, and preventing common childhood infections. I start out, though, with an analysis of a new book people have been emailing me about: The Plant Paradox. The title of the first video (see below) kind of gives it away, but I thought folks might appreciate a deeper dive into the lectins issue and so I did that too. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now.   Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:  Dr. Gundry’s “The Plant Paradox” is Wrong How to Avoid Lectin Poisoning Are Lectins in Food Good or Bad for You? Benefits of Turmeric for Arsenic Exposure Fever Benefits for Autism in a Food Fighting Autism Brain Inflammation with Food Best Foods for Autism Is Sodium Lauryl Sulfate Safe? Is CAPB in SLS-Free Toothpaste Any Better? Does Cell Phone Radiation Cause Cancer? Cell Phone Brain Tumor Risk? Is it Worth Getting Annual Health Check-Ups? Is it Worth Getting an Annual Physical Exam? Eczema Treatment with Evening Primrose Oil, Borage Oil vs. Hempseed Oil Eczema Treatment with Coconut Oil, Mineral Oil, vs. Vaseline The Best Diet for Fibroids The Best Food for Fibroids Are Avocados Healthy? Culture Shock: Questioning the Efficacy and Safety of Probiotics The Best Food for High Cholesterol Amla vs. Drugs for Cholesterol, Inflammation, and Blood-Thinning Lycopene Supplements vs. Prostate Cancer Tomato Sauce vs. Prostate Cancer Saffron vs. Memantine (Namenda) for Alzheimer’s Best Food to Prevent Common Childhood Infections Lead Contamination in Fish and Game  Order my new DVD as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads, or on Amazon here. All proceeds go to keeping the site going and growing.