 The Mediterranean Diet is an “in” topic nowadays, in both the medical literature and the lay media. More than 450 papers were published in the medical literature during just the last year alone, more than one a day. As a recent commentary noted “Uncritical laudatory coverage is the common parlance. Specifics are hard to come by: what is it? what is its history? why is it good? Merits are rarely detailed; possible downsides are never mentioned.” I answer these questions and more in a 6-part video series:  Why Was Heart Disease Rare in the Mediterranean? The Mediterranean Diet or a Whole Food Plant-Based Diet? PREDIMED: Does Eating Nuts Prevent Strokes? Which Parts of the Mediterranean Diet Extended Life? Do Flexitarians Live Longer? Improving on the Mediterranean Diet  They are all available right now as a video download as part of my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 23 (all proceeds go to this charity). It can also be ordered as a physical DVD. The Mediterranean videos are all scheduled to go up on NutritionFacts.org by mid-March, but you can download and watch them right now. The current batch of videos from volume 22 on NutritionFacts.org just ran out, so starting next month and running through April, I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 23. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts, but there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online here at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works–40+ hours of video–you can get the complete DVD collection. Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 23 DVD — a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:  The Problem with the Paleo Diet Argument What Causes Insulin Resistance? The Spillover Effect Links Obesity to Diabetes Lipotoxicity: How Saturated Fat Raises Blood Sugar Plant-Based Workplace Intervention The Cilantro Gene Reducing Glycotoxin Intake to Prevent Alzheimers Optimal Cholesterol Level Preventing Ulcerative Colitis with Diet Stool pH and Colon Cancer Why Was Heart Disease Rare in the Mediterranean? The Mediterranean Diet or a Whole Food Plant-Based Diet? PREDIMED: Does Eating Nuts Prevent Strokes? Which Parts of the Mediterranean Diet Extended Life? Do Flexitarians Live Longer? Improving on the Mediterranean Diet Exercise vs. Drugs for Depression Do Antidepressant Drugs Really Work? Is Milk Good for Our Bones? If White Rice is Linked to Diabetes, What About China? Oatmeal Lotion for Chemotherapy-Induced Rash Can Oatmeal Help Fatty Liver Disease? Nutritional Yeast to Prevent the Common Cold ALS (Lou Gehrig’s Disease): Fishing for Answers Diet and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) How Much Fruit Is Too Much?  Order my new DVD at DrGreger.org/dvds or through Amazon. It can also be ordered as a video download at DrGreger.org/downloads.   DVD Subscription If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a Mediterranean diet expert by now, having gotten the new DVD last week! I now come out with DVDs every 9 weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor. Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both–your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 23 yet, please email Tommasina@NutritionFacts.org and she’ll make everything all better. If you’d rather just watch all the videos online as they launch, but would still like to support my work of helping to educate millions about healthy eating, you can make a tax-deductible donation to NutritionFacts.org using a credit card, a direct PayPal link, or by sending a check to NutritionFacts.org P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913. In my next DVD I’ll dig into whether organic fruits and vegetables are safer and healthier enough to justify the extra cost–stay tuned! -Michael Greger  