 You may remember the fun broccoli apron I wore in my “In the Kitchen” videos (here and here). These aprons are back by popular demand, along with a fun new t-shirt and sweatshirt, designed by our talented summer intern (thank you, Bryan!).  Support the continued nonprofit work of NutritionFacts.org and look cruciferocious at the same time! This limited-time fundraiser runs through October 4. Get your swag at http://bit.ly/NutritionFactscollection.  Now on Facebook Watch If you follow NutritionFacts.org on Facebook, you might have noticed a few changes in the way our page looks. That’s because we are now a Watch page. Facebook saw that our primary content was video and invited us to convert over. Now if you follow us there, you’ll be notified when new episodes are added, while still seeing all of our great non-video content.           Calling More Volunteers We are seeking volunteers experienced in translating into Sanskrit-Hindi to help make our videos more accessible to the Indian community and also looking for volunteers fluent in Mandarin with a medical or nutrition background to help answer questions on our Chinese Social Media profiles. For more information and to apply, visit NutritionFacts.org/volunteer.               Federal Employee CFC Are you a federal worker? You can show some love for evidence-based nutrition by giving to NutritionFacts.org through the CFC workplace giving program. Be sure to look for us in the upcoming enrollment period, with designation number 26461.          Live Q&A TODAY Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and today, Sept 27 is the day.  Facebook Live: At 12:00 p.m. ET TODAY go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 1:00 p.m. ET TODAY go here to watch live and ask even more questions!   You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at http://nutritionfacts.org/audio.    In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:  2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers    