 It’s Giving Tuesday Today is #GivingTuesday, kicking off the charitable season with a celebration of giving and philanthropy. To commemorate it this year, we’ve created a limited edition 2019 NutritionFacts.org Staff Recipe Calendar. If your annual wall calendar doesn’t specify when National Kale Day is (first Wednesday of October, duh) then you have the wrong calendar! This year’s recipes include Purple Sweet Potato Burgers (Kristina, Social Media Director), Almond Berry Crunch Bars (Steven, Global Volunteer Director), Curried Chickpea Wraps from my How Not to Die Cookbook, and more…directly from the kitchens of our staff members! The first 200 people to donate $100 or more to keep my 501c3 nonprofit NutritionFacts.org alive and thriving will get a calendar in time for the new year. Don’t wait—we ran out within a few days last year. Update: calendars have all been spoken for. Thank you for your support!   Gift Cards Available   Shopping for someone else but not sure what to give them? How about the gift of science promotion with a DrGreger.org gift card (100% of proceeds go to NutritionFacts.org). Cards are available in three designs and come in denominations of $10, $25, $50, and $100. You can send them via e-mail or print them out and give them as a physical gift. Check them out here.      Federal Employee CFC Are you a federal worker? You can also show some love for evidence-based nutrition by giving to NutritionFacts.org through the CFC workplace giving program. Look for our designation number: 26461.        Get a Dr. Ornish Bookplate!   My dear friend and colleague, Dean Ornish, has a new book coming out that’s available right now for preorder. His 40 years of revolutionary scientific research proving that comprehensive lifestyle changes can often reverse some of our deadliest diseases essentially launched the entire field of lifestyle medicine, now the most exciting movement in medicine today. He asked me how I got so many preorders for my books and I told him you just have to put yourself out there. And look, he took my advice! Be one of the first 2,500 people to preorder UnDo It! and you’ll receive your very own personalized bookplate signed by Dr. Dean Ornish and Anne Ornish. (Actually, one of the first 2,499 since I just ordered mine!)     New Look Coming Soon A brand new video experience is coming to NutritionFacts.org. In the next couple of weeks, we will be launching a stylin’ new video interface for enhanced viewing, an option for continuously playing videos, subtitle selection for our multilingual users, floating video player on scroll, and the all-new Theater Mode. I’m excited to see it myself!       Q&As Temporarily on Hold Every month for the last two years, I have done live Q&As on Facebook and YouTube. I love this opportunity to answer all your burning questions directly, but right now I’m in the final stretch of finishing my next tome and every minute counts. So I need to put the Q&As on hold until April, but once How Not to Diet is finally out (fingers crossed for December 2019!) I hope you’ll agree that it was worth it. Until I get back to it, you can dive into my past live chats right here on NutritionFacts.org. And remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at http://nutritionfacts.org/audio.    This year, as every year, I give thanks to you and everyone who has supported me and my work to spread the power and hope of evidence-based nutrition, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:  2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers    