 Help Keep NutritionFacts.org Going and Growing There are some people who will never change, and God bless ’em. If they want to smoke cigarettes, go bungee jumping, it’s their body, their choice. But I think most people are just confused. They want to live long, healthy lives, want to take better care of their families, but are bombarded by billion dollar industries bent on sowing confusion in hopes people will just throw up their hands and eat whatever’s put in front of them. But the good news is that we have tremendous power over our health destiny and longevity—the vast majority of premature death and disability is preventable with a healthy enough diet and lifestyle. The science is in, but it’s being drowned out by commercial interests that may not have our family’s best interests at heart. I hope you consider me a partner in the struggle to get at the truth. Nearly 190,000 scientific papers on nutrition were published over the past year, about 500 a day. Please help us sift through all that science, so you… don’t have to! Today is the start of our annual end-of-year fundraising drive. Year after year, more than half of our entire annual operating budget has been raised around these final few weeks of the year. So we count on your giving-season generosity to make a tax-deductible donation to keep NutritionFacts.org going and growing. I may be the face of NutritionFacts.org, but there’s a veritable army of volunteers and a dozen staff behind the scenes. They help me churn through the thousands of studies a week to stay on top of the science, so we can bring you daily videos and articles on the latest in evidence-based nutrition. This is only possible because of you. Every year, thousands of people step forward and make donations large and small to express appreciation for our work. Hundreds have even signed up to be monthly donors, which helps ensure a predictable steady stream of support. Please “root” for the facts by helping us fill the carrot! It’s a numbers game; even a single dollar can help. On the Donate Page you can make a tax-deductible donation using a credit card, Bitcoin, transferring stock, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913. (Federal employees may donate through the CFC workplace giving program with designation number 26461.)   Donate with Amazon Smile There are even more ways you can support NutritionFacts.org. If you’re shopping on Amazon this holiday season, shop through smile.amazon.com, choose to support NutritionFacts.org, and a portion of your purchases will be donated to us, at no extra cost to you.             Why I Give: A Donor Story “I am a Nutrition and Culinary Arts Instructor at a community college. I am also a Registered Dietitian, providing consults and demos for community members. I share NutritionFacts videos with my students and clients all the time, in presentations and to help answer questions on specific nutrition topics… When they ask me what to eat, my current favorite answer is what Dr. Greger shared with me, when I met him at a potluck, ‘Plants!’ 