 The current batch of videos from volume 8 are set to run out soon, and so starting this week, and running up until August here on NutritionFacts.org, I’ll be rolling out the videos off my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD, volume 9. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share as gifts, but there’s nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up here for free at NutritionFacts.org. The Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 9 DVD is available for purchase now, and through Amazon. Here’s the list of chapters off the new DVD, a preview of what’s to come on NutritionFacts.org:  SAD States Amnesic Seafood Poisoning  A Fine Kettle of Fluoxetine  Red Fish, White Fish; Dark Fish, Atrial Fibrillation  Hair Testing for Mercury Before Considering Pregnancy Nerves of Mercury Which Brand of Tuna Has the Most Mercury? Health Food Store Supplement Advice Bad Advice from Health Food Store Employees Dangerous Advice from Health Food Store Employees Pharmacists vs. Health Food Store Employees: Who Gives Better Advice? Dietary Supplement Snake Oil Heavy Metals in Protein Powder Supplements Some Dietary Supplements May Be More than a Waste of Money Handwashing Compliance of Retail Deli Workers Don’t Put Your Money Where Your Mouth Is Tongue Worm in Human Eye Viral Meat Spray Maggot Meat Spray Not so Delusional Parasitosis Unsafe at Any Feed Zero Tolerance to Acceptable Risk Arterial Acne Blocking the First Step of Heart Disease Making Our Arteries Less Sticky Chamomile Tea May Not Be Safe During Pregnancy Is Hydroponic Basil as Healthy? Boosting Immunity Through Diet Anti-inflammatory Effects of Purple Potatoes Fighting Inflammation in a Nut Shell Achieving Remission of Crohn’s Disease The Leaky Gut Theory of Why Animal Products Cause Inflammation The Exogenous Endotoxin Theory Dead Meat Bacteria Endotoxemia Antimutagenic Activity of Green vs. White Tea Is Caffeinated Tea Dehydrating? Treating Gorlin Syndrome with Green Tea Treating Genital Warts with Green Tea Preventing Kidney Failure Through Diet Treating Kidney Failure Through Diet Kiwifruit for Irritable Bowel Syndrome Kiwifruit and DNA Repair Plant-based Diets and Cellular Stress Defenses What Women Should Eat to Live Longer Americans Are Living Longer but Sicker Lives The Benefits of Caloric Restriction Without the Actual Restricting New Mineral Absorption Enhancers Found Risk Associated with Iron Supplements How Do Nuts Prevent Sudden Cardiac Death? Mineral of the Year: Magnesium  Remember, you are what you eat, so please–eat healthy, -Michael Greger, M.D.  