 The current batch of videos from volume 6 are set to run out before Christmas, and so starting December 26, and running through March here on NutritionFacts.org, I’ll be rolling out the videos off my new Latest in Nutrition DVD, volume 7. Now that all my videos are posted free online, I wasn’t sure there would continue to be interest in the DVDs, but demand continues to grow, so at least for the time being I’ll keep them in production. They do give people the opportunity to sneak preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share as gifts, but there’s nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up here on NutritionFacts.org. The Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 7 DVD is available for purchase now or through Amazon. Here’s the list of chapters off the new DVD, a preview of what’s to come on NutritionFacts.org:  Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms: Ticking Time Balloons How to Help Prevent Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms Glycotoxins Avoiding a Sugary Grave Preventing Childhood Allergies Preventing Adulthood Allergies Say No to Drugs by Saying Yes to Plants Throw Household Products off the Scent Carcinogenic Putrescine Better than Green Tea Best Berries Dried Apples vs. Cholesterol Better than Goji Berries Amla vs. Cancer Cell Growth Amla vs. Cancer Cell Invasion Power Plants Amla vs. Diabetes Antioxidants in a Pinch Better Breakfast Ayurvedic Medicine Worse Than Lead Paint Exposure? Get the Lead Out Amla and Triphala Tested for Metals Dragon’s Blood Anti up on the Veggies Anti-inflammatory Antioxidants The Power of NO Bulking up on Antioxidants Atkins Diet: Trouble Keeping It Up Plant-based Atkins Diet Vitamin B12 Recommendation Change Safest Source of B12 Cheapest Source of Vitamin B12 Daily Source of Vitamin B12 New Vitamin B12 Test Soy Worth a Hill of Beans? Doping with Beet Juice Priming the Proton Pump Don’t Use Antiseptic Mouthwash Out of the Lab Onto the Track Asparagus Pee Pretty in Pee-nk Hearts Shouldn’t Skip a Beet Vegetables Rate by Nitrate Is Bacon Good or Is Spinach Bad? When Nitrites Go Bad Bacon and Botulism Are Nitrates Pollutants or Nutrients? Prevention Is Better Than Cured Meat Carcinogens in the Smell of Frying Bacon Vitamin C Enriched Bacon So Should We Drink Beet Juice or Not? Meat Additives to Diminish Toxicity  I hope it will help folks re-dedicate themselves to living and eating healthier in the New Year. -Michael Greger, M.D.  