 Show off your love for NutritionFacts.org with these limited-edition products!  This summer, we’ve got brand new designs on a tee, tank, and mask. Funds raised help my team and I continue to bring you the bite-sized lifestyle medicine information you count on. Get the swag here.  New Webinar: The Human Health Implications of Plant-Based and Cultivated Meat for Pandemic Prevention and Climate Mitigation  In my new book How to Survive a Pandemic and my last COVID-19 webinar I marveled at the constellation of new consumer choices in the dairy and meat aisle helping to innovate us out of our precarious situation with regards to the pandemic threats posed by animal agriculture. Plant-based meats, milks, and egg products—as well as even more pioneering approaches involving cellular agriculture—could also offer enormous benefits for the climate crisis. But what are the nutritional and personal human health effects of eating products like Beyond Meat and the Impossible Burger, or even actual animal products grown without the animals?   I did a deep dive and crafted a dozen videos on the topic that I’m going to unveil in a 2-hour live webinar with Q&A at 2pm ET on August 26:   1.   The Environmental Impacts of Plant-Based Meat Alternatives 2.   Are Beyond Meat and the Impossible Burger Healthy? 3.   Are Pea and Soy Protein Isolates Harmful? 4.   Plant-Based Meat Alternatives Put to the Test 5.   The Health Effects of Mycoprotein (Quorn) Products 6.   What About the Heme in Impossible Burgers? 7.   Does Heme Iron Cause Cancer? 8.   Heme-Induced N-Nitroso Compounds and Fat Oxidation 9.   Is Heme the Reason Meat Is Carcinogenic? 10. The Human Health Effects of Cultivated Meat: Food Safety 11. The Human Health Effects of Cultivated Meat: Antibiotic Resistance 12. The Human Health Effects of Cultivated Meat: Chemical Safety   All of these videos will eventually be available for free on NutritionFacts.org, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch it all now by joining me in this live webinar and get your burning questions answered. UPDATE: The digital download of this webinar’s videos is now available here. Last day to register: August 19th Webinar date & time: August 26th, 2pm ET   And if you missed my last webinar on my latest B12 recommendations, you can now get the digital download of those videos. How to Survive a Pandemic – Paperback Edition  After first being released only in audio and digital format, my newest book is now available for paperback pre-order and will be out on August 18. Pre-order it today! 