 My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. In this new volume, I have videos on treating metastatic cancer with diet, coconut oil and candida; but, the focus is on arsenic in rice: which brands and types of rice are the safest, what’s the best way to cook it to reduce arsenic exposure, and questioning whether the benefits of even whole grain brown rice outweigh the risks. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now.  Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months here on NutritionFacts.org:  The Antioxidant Effects of Acai vs. Apples The Benefits of Acai vs. Blueberries for Artery Function Where Does the Arsenic in Chicken Come From? Where Does the Arsenic in Rice, Mushrooms, and Wine Come From? The Effects of Too Much Arsenic in the Diet Cancer Risk from Arsenic in Rice and Seaweed Which Rice Has Less Arsenic: Black, Brown, Red, White or Wild? Which Brands and Sources of Rice Have the Least Arsenic? How to Cook Rice to Lower Arsenic Levels Arsenic in Infant Rice Cereal Arsenic in Rice Milk, Rice Krispies, and Brown Rice Syrup How Risky is the Arsenic in Rice? How Much Arsenic in Rice is Too Much? Is White Rice a Yellow Light or Red Light Food? Do the Pros of Brown Rice Outweigh the Cons of Arsenic? Saffron for Erectile Dysfunction Coconut Oil and the Boost in HDL “Good” Cholesterol What About Coconuts, Coconut Milk, and Coconut Oil MCTs? Treating Advanced Prostate Cancer with Diet: Part 1 Treating Advanced Prostate Cancer with Diet: Part 2 Lead Contamination in Hot Sauces Does Nutritional Yeast Trigger Crohn’s Disease? Is Candida Syndrome Real? Is Nutritional Yeast Healthy for Everyone? Dietary Cure for Hidradenitis Suppurativa How to Reduce Your TMAO Levels  Order my new DVD as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads, or on Amazon here. All proceeds go to keeping the site going and growing. DVD Subscription If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be an arsenic expert, having already received a link to the new DVD. New DVDs are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor. Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, you should have already received this volume, but if not please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better. PBS Special I’m so excited to announce that I just taped my first TV special last week, which should premiere on PBS in select cities in August and then go nationwide in October or December. As soon as I know more details, I’ll let everyone know!     Moderators Needed If you are a nutrition or medical professional and are interested in helping out on the site, we’d love to bring you on as a volunteer moderator, helping millions to achieve a healthier lifestyle with evidence-based nutrition. Apply here. Live Q&A  Every month now I’m doing Q&As live from my treadmill, and July 27th is the next one.  Facebook Live: At 1:00 p.m. ET July 27th go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 3:00 p.m. ET July 27th go here to watch live and ask even more questions!     If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at http://nutritionfacts.org/audio/ In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:  2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers   