 How to Survive a Pandemic is now out! Note: if you checked on Amazon and noticed the Kindle and paperback versions were not available before, they are now! Join my email list to receive the preface of the book for free.  I have a feeling many think How Not to Die is my first book, but it’s actually my 4th. Before I started NutritionFacts.org and switched to working on chronic disease, I had a career as Public Health Director at HSUS in Washington, DC specializing in emerging infectious disease. It was in that role that I was invited to defend Oprah, appeared on the Colbert Report, lectured at NIH and the Conference on World Affairs, and got to testify before Congress. With my How Not to Diet book tour suspended, the COVID-19 crisis allowed me an opportunity to draw on my past expertise to fast-track this new book.  If you haven’t seen it yet, we’ve put up a resource page all about COVID-19 with videos, links to my pandemic blog post and special Q&A sessions, a DIY hand sanitizer recipe, and more. Check it out here. And I’ve been doing a bunch of interviews lately, notably one with Moby and Joaquin Phoenix that you can watch here, as well as an article from Vox.  New webinar – June 26 On June 26th I’m going to be doing a 1.5-hour live webinar to explain the rationale for my new vitamin B12 recommendations and answer any questions you may have. I’ll start out with a discussion of the symptoms of B12 deficiency and then explain how I arrived at what I consider the optimal dose of vitamin B12 supplements in children, adults, the elderly, and during pregnancy. I’ll clarify why cyanocobalamin (not methylcobalamin) is the best type of vitamin B12 supplement and address the data suggesting B12 supplements cause acne, bone fractures, and lung cancer. I’ll also cover the healthiest food sources of B12 for those that don’t want to take supplements. I hope you’ll join me! Register by making a donation of any amount through this form. Registration ends: June 19 Webinar date & time: June 26, 2:00-3:30pm ET        COVID-19 Live Q&A Replay of my COVID-19 Q&A last month.     Benefits of Quinoa for Lowering Triglycerides How does the nutrition and health benefits of quinoa compare to whole grains, and does it aid in lowering triglycerides?   The Role of Processed Foods in the Obesity Epidemic The rise in the U.S. calorie supply responsible for national weight gain and the obesity epidemic wasn’t just about more food, but a different kind of food – processed food.   Live Q&As May 28 Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and Thursday, May 28 is the day.  Facebook Live: At 12:00 p.m. ET go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 1:00 p.m. ET go here to watch live and ask even more questions!   You can now find links to all of my past live Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at http://nutritionfacts.org/audio.   In health, Michael Greger, M.D. PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:  2019: Evidence-Based Weight Loss 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food 2013: More Than an Apple a Day 2012: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death   