 I’m excited to announce that last month the NutritionFacts.org podcast reached #1 on the iTunes health video podcast charts (subscribe here). What perfect timing to announce a new DVD! The newest volume of my Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD series launches today. Order on my website or through Amazon (all proceeds go to keeping NutritionFacts.org alive and kicking). The current batch of videos from volume 12 on NutritionFacts.org are set to run out soon, so starting mid-month and running through July I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 13. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts. However, there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up online free at NutritionFacts.org. If you’re in need of catching up, I’ve packaged the first ten volumes into a 12-disc DVD set. Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 13 DVD — a preview of what’s to come on NutritionFacts.org:  Can Cellulite Be Treated with Diet? Update on Cinnamon for Blood Sugar Control Don’t Eat Too Much Nutmeg The Safety of Tarragon Plant-Based Diets for Breast Pain Flax Seeds for Breast Pain Does a Drink of Water Make Children Smarter? Eating Healthy on a Budget Breast Cancer and Alcohol: How Much Is Safe? Which Fruit Fights Cancer Better? Cranberries vs. Cancer Strawberries vs. Esophageal Cancer Black Raspberries vs. Oral Cancer Boosting Immunity while Reducing Inflammation Preventing and Treating Diarrhea with Probiotics Should Probiotics Be Taken Before, During, or After Meals? Gut Feelings: Probiotics and Mental Health Lavender for Generalized Anxiety Disorder Lavender for Migraine Headaches Bacterial Vaginosis and Diet Avoiding Chicken to Avoid Bladder Infections Can Cranberry Juice Treat Bladder Infections? Childhood Tea Drinking May Increase Fluorosis Risk Fukushima and Radioactivity in Seafood Cancer Risk from CT Scan Radiation Do Dental X-Rays Cause Brain Tumors? Mediating Radiation Exposure from Air Travel Reducing Radiation Damage with Ginger and Lemon Balm Trans Fat in Meat and Dairy Male Fertility and Diet Eggs and Cholesterol: Patently False and Misleading Claims Beans and the Second Meal Effect Why Might Vegetarians Have Less HPV? Breast Cancer Risk: Red Wine vs. White Wine Anti-Angiogenesis: Cutting off Tumor Supply Lines    Order the new DVD on my website or through Amazon The DVDs also function as a fundraiser for the operation of NutritionFacts.org. If you’re just going to wait to watch all the videos here online individually — great! But please consider making a donation. Between end-of-year giving and what I’ve been able to raise so far this year, we have funds sufficient to pay total operating expenses through to mid-August. I’m really hoping to achieve at least a six month buffer, so I can spend less time worrying about fundraising and more time focusing on the research at hand. To make your contribution to NutritionFacts.org Inc. (the 501(c)3 nonprofit charity set up to support the site) you can use a credit card, use a direct Paypal link, or send a check to “NutritionFacts.org” P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913. Hundreds of thousands of people like you benefit every month from the free nutrition education they can get every day at NutritionFacts.org. Have you seen some of the testimonials I’ve been posting on the NutritionFacts.org Facebook page? Read Devin’s story and David’s story. I hope you’ll consider chipping in. On the donate page you have the option to sign up for monthly donations, which really help us budget for the future. Anyone signing up to make at least a $10 monthly donation will receive complimentary sneak preview copies of my next two DVDs before they’re released to the public. -Michael Greger, M.D.  