 The current batch of videos from volume 11 on are set to run out soon here on NutritionFacts.org, so starting mid-month and running through April I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 12. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share as gifts, but there’s nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up online free here at NutritionFacts.org. The Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 12 DVD is available now with all proceeds going to keep NutritionFacts.org operational. If you’re in need of catching up, I’ve packaged the first ten volumes into a 12-disc DVD set. Here’s the list of chapters off the new volume 12 DVD —a preview of what’s to come here on NutritionFacts.org:  Fibromyalgia vs. Vegetarian & Raw Vegan Diets Fibromyalgia vs. Mostly Vegetarian & Mostly Raw Diets Estrogenic Cooked Meat Carcinogens PhIP: The Three Strikes Breast Carcinogen Reducing Cancer Risk in Meat-eaters Heterocyclic Amines in Eggs, Cheese, and Creatine? Cancer, Interrupted: Green Tea Cancer, Interrupted: Garlic & Flavonoids Prolonged Liver Function Enhancement from Broccoli Meat Fumes: Dietary Secondhand Smoke Plant-Based Diets: Oral Health Plant-Based Diets: Dental Health Does Coconut Oil Cure Alzheimer’s? Does Coconut Oil Clog Arteries? Is Vitamin D3 Better than D2? Are Cats or Dogs More Protective for Children’s Health? Can Gargling Prevent the Common Cold? Titanium Dioxide & Inflammatory Bowel Disease Protein, Puberty, and Pollutants Clinical Studies on Acai Berries Preventing Parkinson’s Disease with Diet Treating Parkinson’s Disease with Diet Herbal Tea Update: Hibiscus Eggs vs. Cigarettes in Atherosclerosis Dried Apples, Dates, Figs, or Prunes for Cholesterol? Prunes vs. Metamucil for Constipation Do Fruit & Nut Bars Cause Weight Gain? Raisins vs. Jelly Beans for Athletic Performance Salmonella in Chicken and Turkey: Deadly but Legal Flaxseed vs. Prostate Cancer Was It the Flaxseed, Fat Restriction, or Both? Flaxseed vs. Diabetes Flaxseeds for Sensitive Skin Fiber vs. Breast Cancer Flaxseeds & Breast Cancer Prevention Flaxseeds & Breast Cancer Survival: Epidemiological Evidence Flaxseeds & Breast Cancer Survival: Clinical Evidence The McGovern Report  Order the new DVD on my website or through Amazon. January 1st marked the 500th day of his website’s existence. My heartfelt gratitude to all those who joined in the outpouring of support to keep NutritionFacts.org up and running. Unfortunately, I wasn’t able to raise enough to keep the site going at full capacity, which is why this is the first day since NutritionFacts.org started that there is no video-of-the-day. In 2013, new videos will only appear every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday — but I’m going to start writing two blog posts a week, on Tuesday and Thursday, so if you’re subscribed to daily video and news updates you’ll still be able to enjoy new content every day. Hopefully we’ll be able to raise enough funds this year that I can get back to a daily video schedule. All of my time is donated, but each video can entail charges for things like article and image licensing costs. If you value NutritionFacts.org, you can contribute to our 501c3 nonprofit charity with a credit card, through a direct Paypal link, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913. You can now even involve the whole family at your child’s next birthday party through ECHOage — check it out! Thanks again to all our wonderful supporters and may everyone have a happy and healthy new year. -Michael Greger, M.D.  