 Some of the most common questions I receive are about ketogenic diets and intermittent fasting, so I’ve done a deep dive into the research on both topics and am excited to finally present my findings. You can learn about the latest science on the keto diet in a 7-video series on my new streaming DVD (see below for more information). As for intermittent fasting, I’m excited to announce I’ll be hosting a 3-hour live webinar on July 26th at 2pm ET. I’ll cover the pros and cons of calorie restriction and water-only fasting for weight loss, alternate-day fasting, body fat, longevity and metabolic health, the 5:2 diet, fasting-mimicking diets, and time-restricted feeding – and host a Q&A at the end. The focus for this webinar will be on weight control, but I am planning to do a second webinar later this year on water-only and Buchinger modified fasting for other conditions such as blood pressure, autoimmune disease, and cancer. All of the information will eventually be available for free on NutritionFacts.org, but for a donation to our 501c3 non-profit, you can hear it all first and ask questions right on the spot. To register for the intermittent fasting webinar, visit https://nutritionfacts.org/webinar/intermittent-fasting.  UPDATE: Thanks to everyone who attended the webinar. If you missed it, the digital download is available here: https://drgreger.org/collections/downloads.  New DVD covers keto diet My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. As you can see below, the main focus is a 7-part video series on ketogenic diets, but I also cover a variety of more practical tips such as pressure cooking, the best kind of water filters, and a warning about overdoing the three oxalate-rich greens: spinach, swiss chard, and beet greens. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now. Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:  Oxalates in Spinach and Kidney Stones: Should We Be Concerned? Kidney Stones and Spinach, Chard, and Beet Greens: Don’t Eat Too Much Berries for Inflammation and Osteoarthritis Treatment Should You Floss Before or After You Brush? How to Treat Reflux in Children with Diet The Effects of Marijuana on Fertility and Pregnancy A Political Lesson on the Power of the Food Industry Best Foods for Colon Cancer Prevention The Best Diet for Colon Cancer Prevention Benefits of Flaxseed Meal for Weight Loss How to Stop Tooth Decay Plant-Based Diets Recognized by Diabetes Associations How Many Calories Do You Burn Chewing Gum? Does Chewing Gum Help with Weight Loss? Avoiding Fish for 5 Years Before Pregnancy Is It Best to Drink Tap, Filtered, or Bottled Water? Are Weight Loss Pills Safe? Are Weight Loss Pills Effective? Does Pressure Cooking Preserve Nutrients? Is Keto an Effective Cancer-Fighting Diet? Keto Diet Theory Put to the Test Keto Diet Results for Weight Loss Is Weight Loss on Ketosis Sustainable? Are Keto Diets Safe? Keto Diets: Muscle Growth and Bone Density Does a Ketogenic Diet Help Diabetes or Make It Worse?  Order my new DVD as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads. And remember, if you watch the videos on NutritionFacts.org or YouTube, you can access captions in several different languages. To find yours, click on the settings wheel on the lower-right of the video and then “Subtitles/CC.”     If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a keto expert by now, having already received a link to the new DVD. New DVDs and downloads are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.  Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, your copy is already on its way to you, if you do not have it by now, please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better.    Have Your Donation Matched And if you donate now, your dollars will be doubled! Supporter Steven Oliveira has made a generous offer in honor of his father. All donations made through this link will be matched up to $10,000. Here’s what Steve had to say:  June 13th will mark the one year anniversary of my father’s passing. He suffered from heart disease, kidney stones, dementia, GERD and macular degeneration. Watching the deterioration of my Dad’s health inspired me to learn about nutrition. When I discovered nutritionfacts.org I was blown away; I owe Dr. Greger and the team so much for improving my health and can only imagine how many people have benefited from their work. So in honor of my dear father, I’m offering to match up to $10,000 donated to help spread the word and improve the lives of as many people as possible. We all deserve to know the truth about our health and I’m so thankful we have great people working tirelessly to help us get it. I feel proud and honored to make a contribution that I know will help better the lives of so many people.  Thank you so much, Steve!  Update: Thank you to everyone who helped hit the match in a matter of days! You can still donate here anytime if you’d like to support NutritionFacts.org.    Live Q&As June 27 Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and Thursday, June 27 is the day.  Facebook Live: At 12:00 p.m. ET go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions. YouTube Live Stream: At 1:00 p.m. ET go here to watch live and ask even more questions!   You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at http://nutritionfacts.org/audio, and you can listen to my recent interview on the Plant Proof podcast here.  