 2014 was another banner year for NutritionFacts.org. Thanks to the collective enthusiasm for sharing this work from our subscribers, Twitter followers, and 200,000 Facebook fans, we averaged more than 1.3 million views per month. But it’s not about the numbers; it’s about the people whose lives we’ve touched, changed, or even saved. That is why I volunteer my time to get new videos and articles up every day. A heartfelt thank you to everyone who has made this public service possible. If you’d like to join others who have supported this free, nonprofit, noncommercial effort please consider making a tax-deductible donation here. So far I’ve recorded nearly a thousand videos. If you’re new to the site, where do you even start? Well you can subscribe (for free, of course, like everything else on the site) to get emails daily, weekly, or monthly so as to not miss any of the new ones. As for the existing 50 or so hours of content, you can browse through the 1500+ topics I cover or use the search box to explore any type of food or disease condition. Annually, though, I try to compile the top ten most popular videos of the year to inspire everyone to fulfill their healthy New Year’s resolutions and offer a sampling of what folks seemed most interested in sharing. NutritionFacts.org arises from my annual review of the scientific literature. With the help of a team of fellow volunteers, in 2014 we downloaded, categorized, and reviewed 17,533 papers on human nutrition from the medical literature. Right now I’m in the process of recording the next batch of new 2015 videos. How do I choose which studies to highlight? In general, I strive to focus on the most groundbreaking, interesting, and practical findings, but which topics resonate the most? Is it the practical ones like The Best Way to Cook Sweet Potatoes, offering cooking or shopping tips? Or is it the ones that dissect the studies behind the headlines? Maybe the geeky science ones exploring the wonderfully weird world of human biology? As you can see from the below list, the answer seems to be a bit of all of the above: #10 What’s the Best Mouthwash?  Coming in at #10 is one of the practical ones that changed my own family’s day-to-day rituals. For extra credit, gargle with the green tea concoction, especially now during cold season (Can Gargling Prevent the Common Cold?).       #9 Low Carb Diets and Coronary Blood Flow  I profile the only study to actually measure the blood flow within the hearts of those on low carb diets.         #8 Is Fish Oil Just Snake Oil? Documentation of the seismic shift within the nutrition community as the balance of evidence shifted against the advice to eat oily fish or take fish oil supplements       