 The current batch of videos from volume 10 are about to run out, so starting next week and running into 2013 I’ll be rolling out the videos off my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD, volume 11. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share as gifts, but there’s nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up online free at NutritionFacts.org. The Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 11 DVD is available now (and also available on Amazon). If you’re in need of catching up, I’ve packaged the first ten volumes into a 12-disc DVD set (also on Amazon). Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 11 DVD — a preview of what’s to come here on NutritionFacts.org:  Saffron for the Treatment of PMS Wake Up and Smell the Saffron Saffron vs. Prozac CDC Report on Environmental Chemical Exposure President’s Cancer Panel Report on Environmental Risk Pesticides in Chinese Bamboo Shoots BPA Plastic and Male Sexual Dysfunction Pollutants in Californian Breast Tissue Food Sources of Flame Retardant Chemicals DDT in Umbilical Cord Blood How Fast Can We Detoxify from PCBs? Food Sources of Perfluorochemicals Plants vs. Pesticides The Best Baby Formula The Wrong Way to Detox Lowering Dietary Antibiotic Intake More Antibiotics in White Meat or Dark Meat? Protein and Heart Disease Ergothioneine: A New Vitamin? Changing Protein Recommendations? Plant-Based Bioidentical Hormones Gerson Therapy for Cancer Gerson Therapy vs. Chemotherapy Beauty Is More than Skin Deep Preventing Wrinkles with Diet Standing Up for Your Health Benefits of Fenugreek Seeds ­­Side-Effect of Fenugreek Consumption Sprouting Boosts Antioxidant Content Meat Mythcrushers Aspartame-Induced Fibromyalgia Diet Soda and Preterm Birth Erythritol May Be a Sweet Antioxidant How Diet Soda Could Make Us Gain Weight Neurobiology of Artificial Sweeteners Unsweetening the Diet Cancer as an Autoimmune Disease Clonal Selection Theory of Immunity Clonal Deletion Theory of Immunity The Inflammatory Meat Molecule Neu5Gc How Tumors Use Meat to Grow: Xeno-Autoantibodies Nonhuman Molecules Lining Our Arteries Meat May Exceed Daily Allowance of Irony 98% of American Diets Potassium Deficient Preventing Strokes with Diet Potassium and Autoimmune Disease Metabolic Syndrome and Plant-Based Diets Whole Grains May Work as Well as Drugs Breast Cancer vs. Mushrooms Why Do Asian Women Have Less Breast Cancer? Preventing Breast Cancer by any Greens Necessary Tree Nuts or Peanuts for Breast Cancer Prevention? Miocene Meteorites and Uric Acid Flesh and Fructose Apple Juice May Be Worse than Sugar Water Apple Skin: Peeling Back Cancer  If you haven’t already, you can subscribe for free to my videos at bit.ly/nutritionupdates and watch my 2012 presentation “Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death,” in which I explore the role diet can play in preventing, treating, and even reversing our top 15 killers, at: bit.ly/uprootingdeath -Michael Greger, M.D.  