Whole Food Supplements Is Juice Plus Good For You [<p>First, we want to make it clear that we have no ulterior motives when it comes to supplements. All we care about is doing what is best for patients based on the evidence we have. In fact, our view is not only unpopular but makes us less money (selling supplements is quite lucrative for people) so, unlike other sides of the argument, financial bias influencing our stance is not something our patients need to be concerned about. Moreover, we don’t have any vested interest in whether patients take supplements or not; however, as true patient advocates we do have a vested interest in our patients being well informed. Once truly well informed, then they can decide what works best for them, which may very well be different than what works best for us. Unfortunately, patients often don’t understand all the data and as such rely on other people to help them make their decision. It is very important however, that patients demand thorough exploration of all perspectives of a case prior to agreeing or disagreeing with anyone, especially by people in positions of influence. Unfortunately, we have found that in people’s desire to get healthy they often are quick to add things, like supplements, even after just a hint of good news usually as a result of just hearing part of the story. We see it as our job to add the missing perspective so that people can see everything a little more clearly and then make a truly well-informed decision.</p>, <p>Our biggest struggle as physicians is that almost all of our patient’s think that they are lacking something (or many things) and just need to find that key MISSING ingredient to achieve optimum health. Today I am going to talk about Juice Plus (JP) because this has seemed to receive quite a bit of attention as a possible key ingredient to improving the health of patients around the world. Unfortunately, supporters of JP have not provided a full perspective and as a result misled (possibly even unintentionally) many consumers. As a result it is impossible for consumers to make a truly well informed decision. We are going to use JP as an example of how all supplements and other quick-fix promises of improved health should be approached.</p>, <p>Currently, there is a small group of people who condemn supplements (such as vitamin A and iron) because they are “isolated nutrients.” They do so because there are studies that show that these isolated nutrients can be harmful and as such it makes sense to recommend against their consumption. However, JP is advertised as a “whole food” supplement and because of that is considered a healthier alternative to those potentially dangerous isolated nutrient supplements. Now, we agree, if truly a whole food, then yes, it would be a healthier supplement. But we have three major questions, one, is JP truly a whole food supplement? Two, even if it is a whole food supplement, how do we know we need it if we are already eating whole foods? And three, even if we prove that adding JP improves certain outcomes, are we sure that taking it won’t hurt us in any way? It is important to note from the start that we cannot tell you JP is bad as studies have not been done yet to show that (to do that we need at the very least, 10 year studies in large groups of people). But that doesn’t mean JP is safe either, rather that means it hasn’t been evaluated properly and as a result we just don’t know. And if you couldn’t tell yet, let’s make it clear that based on the limited data we have at this time we do have concerns with JP.</p>, <p>First of all, it is clear that JP is not a whole food supplement at least as we would define whole foods. A whole food supplement of fruits and vegetables (what JP says it is) would be apples and spinach jammed into a capsule. Now clearly you can’t jam a whole apple into a capsule so something has to be manipulated in some way. Even if you remove the water and were left with a dehydrated apple or a dehydrated kale chip you would have a better argument be called a whole food compared to taking the water/juice and throwing away everything else. Now, processing isn’t always unhealthy, such as processing apples into dried apple slices. Although eating a lot of dried fruits may lead to weight gain and for that reason may actually be unhealthy, especially if overconsumed. So when do we process foods you might ask? Likely one of two occasions: first, to change the texture or taste of the food (dehydrating corn into a corn chip or corn cake) and second, to be able to turn something into a substance that can be placed in capsule and sold to people as a way of improving their health (Juice Plus). Since fruits and vegetables have so much fiber that poses a major obstacle to getting a whole food into a capsule. As a result, JP proceeded with a two-step processing of the whole fruits and vegetables they used. First they extracted the juice from these fruits and vegetables eliminating a lot of the bulk from the fiber. Second, they dehydrated the juice into a powder/extract. However, when you extract the juice from a whole food, studies show that you lose as much as 90% of the nutrients with the waste (Journal of food science. Vol. 70, 2005. pp. S167-S171). In fact, much of the “waste” left behind after juicing has actually been shown to promote health and even decrease cancer risk (Food and Chemical Toxicology 45 (2007) 1224–1230). Interestingly, in a huge study looking at the different antioxidant levels of different foods, they showed that whole apples had 5343 umol TE/g per cup (a measure of antioxidant levels) and apple juice had only 975 umol TE/g per cup. That is 5.5 times (550%) more antioxidants in the whole apple compared to the juice! Even the dried apple slices had antioxidant levels many times more than the juice (Oxygen Radical Absorbance Capacity (ORAC) of Selected Foods – 2007, Nutrient Data Laboratory, U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) 2007). So clearly relying on the juice results in a loss of a significant portion of the health promoting factors found in the whole fruit and vegetable.</p>, <p>Worse yet, certain toxins get concentrated in juices that are not an issue when consuming whole fruits. For example, the mycotoxin patulin is responsible for causing the brown spots in apples and is potentially carcinogenic, but can be cut away and easily avoided when eating a whole fruit. However, companies that make juice can use apples that not only have these brown spots but can be downright rotten from this toxin, which causes concern as being a source of increased exposure to these toxins. In one study researchers analyzed different apple juices in countries around the world and found that patulin levels in 66% of the samples exceeded the acceptable limits set by World Health Organization Safety guidelines (Food Chemistry 113 (2009) 420–423). We are not saying that these toxins are concentrated in JP because we just don’t know (as these specific studies have not been done). However, JP’s foundation is juice and as such it is at least a reasonable request to look into this issue further before recommending JP to everyone. Especially when healthy whole foods (that don’t raise these same concerns) are readily accessible to most people who are able to buy JP.</p>, <p>In fact, at this point V8 juice is looking as good as JP if measuring how “whole” the product is. However, JP sinks below V8 on the “whole food” scale because of the second step in processing the fruit and vegetable juice into a powder/extract, a form they could put into a capsule. So JP took an already nutrient depleted juice (compared to its whole food counterpart) and processed it into a powder, resulting in even more nutrient loss. As such JP had to then add a list of isolated nutrients back to the JP concoction just so it could have the amounts of nutrients advertised on the labels. In other words, the processed juice of the fruits and vegetables doesn’t provide all of the nutrients listed on the JP label rather that is provided by the added isolated nutrients, which in our opinion is the complete opposite of how JP advertises itself. In fact, JP even admitted that they supplemented their product with isolated nutrients in the past (Samman 133 (11): 3726. (2003)).</p>, <p>Before we go on, here is a list of the ingredients of some of the common JP products, so you can see for yourself exactly what we are going to talk about:</p>, <p class="text-center"><strong>Juice Plus Garden Blend</strong><br>Serving Size = 2 capsules (1.5 g)</br></p>, <p class="text-center"><strong>Ingredients</strong><br/><small>Vegetable juice powder and pulp from carrots, parsley, beets. kale, broccoli, cabbage, spinach, and tomato; gelatin, lipase, amylase, protease, cellulase, beet fiber, barley bran, oat bran, cabbage fiber, glucomannan, plant cellulose, dried plant fiber, lactobacillus acidophilus, vegetable-derived magnesium stearate, anthocyanins, allicin, lycopene, polyphenol catechins, Dunaliella salina (algae), and indole carbinols.</small></p>, <p class="text-center"><strong>Juice Plus Orchard Blend</strong><br/>Serving Size = 2 capsules (1.5 g)</p>, <p class="text-center"><strong>Ingredients</strong><br/><small>Fruit juice powder and pulp from apple, orange, pineapple, cranberry, peach, acerola cherry, and papaya; gelatin, bromelain, papain, lipase, amylase, protease, and cellulase; apple pectin, citrus pectin, date fiber, prune powder, glucomannan, citrus bioflavenoids, dried plant fiber, <em>Lactobacillus acidophilus</em>, vegetable-derived magnesium stearate, anthocyanins, polyphenol catechins, <em>Dunaliella salina</em> (algae), and insole carbinols.</small></p>, <p class="text-center"><strong>Juice Plus Gummies</strong><br/>Serving Size = 6 gummies</p>, <p class="text-center"><strong>Ingredients</strong><br/><small>Corn syrup (84.7%), gelatin (10.3%), citric acid (3%), natural flavors (1.4%), natural colors (0.6%).</small></p>, <p class="text-center"><strong>Fruit Gummies</strong><br/><small>Natural sweeteners (corn syrup, beet powder, clarified grape juice concentrate), gelatin, dried fruit juice powder and pulp (apple, orange, pineapple, cranberry, peach), acerola cherry, papaya, apple pectin, citrus pectin, glucomannan, citrus bioflavonoids, date fiber, prune powder, Dunaliella salina, lactobacillus acidophilus, citric acid, bromelain, papain, natural flavors, natural blend coating, mixed tocopherol stabilizers.</small></p>, <p class="text-center"><strong>Vegetable Gummies</strong><br/><small>Natural sweeteners (corn syrup, beet powder, clarified grape juice concentrate, elderberry powder), gelatin, dried vegetable juice powder and pulp (carrot, parsley, beet, kale, broccoli, cabbage, spinach, tomato), beet fiber, barley bran, oat bran, glucomannan, Dunaliella salina, acidophilus, citric acid, bromelain, papain, natural flavors, natural blend coating, mixed tocopherol stabilizers.</small></p>, <p>As you can see, JP lists a lot of ingredients that look suspiciously unlike any whole foods we have seen before. Moreover, the names of many of the ingredients are complicated so we took the liberty of explaining what some of this stuff was. Without knowing that information how could we, or anyone else for that matter, make a truly informed decision about whether or not to take the JP product? Let us now go through the list of JP ingredients and carefully examine this product that is being sold to people as a whole food supplement.</p>, <p>First there is the dehydrated juice of the fruits and vegetables that is processed into a powder. We have already discussed that so let’s move on to the next ingredient, which is gelatin (an animal protein). Animal proteins are connected to many problems including osteoporosis, food allergies, gout, and kidney stones to name a few (Am J Clin Nutr 1988;48:837-41; J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007 Dec;120(6):1399-405. Epub 2007 Nov 1.; N Engl J Med. 2004 Mar 11;350(11):1093-103; J Clin Endocrinol Metab.1988 Jan;66(1):140-6.). We have found that JP is often taken by people who are trying to avoid animal proteins (possibly not realizing they are getting a dose of animal protein with each pill or gummie), so this needs to be made clear, especially in the population likely to purchase JP.</p>, <p>Next, to the dehydrated juice extract wrapped in an animal protein shell, JP then adds plant enzymes. Supplement consumers seem to be attracted to enzymes. This is likely due to their deep-rooted fear that the human body is deficient and that they feel lousy because of elements missing such as enzymes to digest their food. In fact, enzymes are really unnecessary for people (unless a proven enzyme deficiency), and still potentially harmful even if taken for a proven deficiency (N Engl J Med1997;336:1283-9.). What’s more, plant enzymes are particularly useless in humans. Humans make all of the enzymes they need for the specific reactions that go on in their human bodies. Plant enzymes are made for reactions that go on in plants. We don’t require plant enzymes rather we use our own human enzymes to digest our food. However, even if we wanted to acquire our enzymes from an external source (instead of relying on our bodies to make the appropriate types and mounts), we still have the problem that acid deactivates enzymes. And acid is the first obstacle encountered by substances we ingest. So not only are supplemental enzymes unnecessary in most people but they are likely deactivated anyway. Nevertheless, people seem to get excited when they see enzymes in the mix of ingredients. If only these people realized that their stomach issues and other health problems were due to a plant <strong>food</strong> deficiency rather than a plant <strong>enzyme</strong> deficiency…life would be much better. Well, until that happens, adding enzymes to supplement products will likely just boost sales.</p>, <p>Going forward in the ingredient list we get to the different fiber supplements that are added back to the pill. This seems a little silly. Why remove all the juice from the original fruits and vegetables (originally full of fiber), leaving the “waste” (which we know based on medical studies was still extremely health promoting), only to add back different fibers (that come from isolated sources such as date fiber, citrus pectin, etc.) rather than just consume the whole food in the first place? This seems like a lot of trouble to go through when you could just simply eat the apple, orange, pineapple, cranberry, peach, acerola cherry, and papaya (whole fruits) and accomplish all of your goals in a much cheaper and safer fashion.</p>, <p>The next ingredients are citrus bioflavonoids, which are types of antioxidants. Again this is an isolated nutrient where they take a citrus fruit and extract the bioflavonoids. For someone to say this is less of an isolated nutrient than beta-carotene supplements doesn’t make much sense. Why would extracting bioflavonoids from a plant be any different than extracting beta-carotene from a plant? Wouldn’t it at least be reasonable to wait and perform good, long-term studies (larger groups of people over 10 years) prior to taking an isolated nutrient like citrus bioflavanoids and especially before recommending that everyone starts consuming these supplements? It seems irresponsible not to wait considering studies already exist showing that taking an isolated nutrient like beta- carotene increases the overall risk of cancer and death (<em>JAMA</em>. 2007;297(8):842-857)?</p>, <p>It is true that increased fruit and vegetable consumption is associated with a decreased incidence of cardiovascular diseases, cancer, and other chronic diseases (<em>Am J Clin Nutr</em> 2002;76:1–2.). However, the beneficial health effects of fruits and vegetables have been attributed, in part, to antioxidant flavonoids present in these foods rather than the whole foods themselves. An interesting article took a look at this phenomenon a little more closely. (Free Radical Biology and Medicine Volume 41, Issue 12, 15 December 2006, pp. 1727-1746) This article said, “ large, transient increases in the total antioxidant capacity of plasma have often been observed after the consumption of flavonoid-rich foods by humans. These observations led to the hypothesis that dietary flavonoids play a significant role as antioxidants in the body, thereby reducing chronic disease risk. This notion, however, has been challenged recently by studies on the bioavailability of flavonoids, which indicate that they reach only very low concentrations in human plasma after the consumption of flavonoid-rich foods. In addition, most flavonoids are extensively metabolized in vivo, which can affect their antioxidant capacity. Furthermore, fruits and vegetables contain many macro- and micronutrients, in addition to flavonoids, that may directly or through their metabolism affect the total antioxidant capacity of plasma.” This article concluded that the antioxidant effects are not due to the flavonoids themselves rather they are due to what happens both directly and indirectly as a result of eating the whole food. This conclusion would make adding bioflavonoids to foods unnecessary and potentially risky (as in the beta carotene example). What’s more, there are over 5000 different naturally occurring bioflavonoids occurring in plants so not only are we getting even more bioflavonoids than those 5000 when we consume whole fruits and vegetables (as we likely we haven’t discovered many that are still being consumed when eating whole foods). Moreover, to pick some and add them into a capsule in an imbalanced and haphazard fashion is potentially dangerous (Biotechnology Journal Volume 2 Issue 10, Pages 1214 – 1234).</p>, <p>As usual we need to stop our reductionist thought process in general, especially when dealing with this new bioflavonoid craze. According to an article that quotes Balz Frei, professor and director of the Linus Pauling Institute (a national leader in the study of such phytochemicals, or a plant chemicals that may affect human health). In an Oregon State University News Media Release he said, “flavonoids are highly metabolized, which alters their chemical structure and diminishes their ability to function as an antioxidant.” He then went on to say, “If you measure the activity of flavonoids in a test tube, they are indeed strong antioxidants. Based on laboratory tests of their ability to scavenge free radicals, it appears they have 3-5 times more antioxidant capacity than vitamins C or E. But with flavonoids in particular, what goes on in a test tube is not what’s happening in the human body. The body sees them as foreign compounds and modifies them for rapid excretion in the urine and bile.” Unfortunately, when looking at real life situations (rather than the test tube in a lab) the 5% of flavonoids actually absorbed is rapidly metabolized and excreted from the body (Free Radical Biology &amp; Medicine, Vol. 36, No. 2, pp. 201 – 211, 2004). In other words, what we think we know is occurring may not actually be happening and our reductionist approach to dealing with this complex system is potentially very dangerous.</p>, <p>Other ingredients in JP include catechins which are antioxidants found in tea. Yes, they have done studies in mice that showed some minimal decrease in accumulation of plaque in arteries when injected with antioxidants like EGCG from green tea extract (<em>Circulation</em>. 2004;109:2448-2453). But this was in very sick mice (because they were genetically altered for research purposes) with total cholesterols over 1000mg/dL (note normal cholesterol in humans is around 150mg/dL). Moreover, the change in plaque size was a mere 15 thousandths of a millimeter (0.015mm), which is very small with an unknown, if any, clinical significance. So this study at best says that maybe in humans, although we don’t know for sure as this was in mice, injecting antioxidants from green tea extract helps decrease plaque build up a very little bit. And despite all of that we still don’t know if that has any effect on our chance of heart attacks or overall death. But on the flip side there are studies that show that green tea extract consumption may cause liver failure in humans (Liver Transplantation 12:1892-1895, 2006). So even if there was some benefit on the blood vessels, we still have to weigh that against risks such as liver failure. With these questions not adequately answered, maybe it is better to drink the green tea from the whole tea leaf rather than consume substances like catechins found in the tea leaf particles or worse, inject the extracts. Especially given the fact that some data actually suggest that the benefit of tea on our blood vessels has nothing to do with catechins and other antioxidants (Free Radical Biology and Medicine Volume 38, Issue 4, 15 February 2005, Pages 499-506 ). Ultimately, we know drinking tea is not only safe but also connected to many healthy benefits, so why not just continue drinking it from the whole tea leaf? Why go out of our way to spend the time and money reducing a healthy product like a tea leaf into an extract to then be consumed, when focusing on this single isolated ingredient could result not only in our missing the part or parts of the tea leaf that are actually promoting health but possibly also cause actual harm?</p>, <p>One of the most common mistakes we make is assuming that if something is healthy in its natural form then to manipulate it (processing it into an extract) or taking tons of it (taking capsules full of the substances) is even better. This is a dangerous assumption as more is not always better. Taking healthy foods and then concentrating them and/or taking them in increased amounts has in fact been shown to be harmful. For example, turmeric is a very healthy spice shown to have anticancer and antimicrobial benefits. In fact, turmeric was found to inhibit cancer cell invasion and possibly be important at preventing cancer metastases (Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry 20 (2009) 87–95) and was even being considered as a leading possible treatment for multi-drug resistance breast cancer (Steroid Enzymes and Cancer: Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1155: 278–283 (2009). However, when they looked at larger supplement doses of turmeric they actually found that it caused problems such as increased urinary oxalate levels and increased kidney stones (Am J Clin Nutr 2008;87:1262–7). In fact, some studies have shown that curcumin, the active ingredient of the spice turmeric, may produce toxic and carcinogenic effects under specific conditions and may also alter the effectiveness of certain cancer treatments. (Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2008, 52, S103 – S127). So a little bit of turmeric to season food appears to be perfectly safe and likely health promoting, but when we start manipulating the spice or taking it in larger, supplemental doses we actually can cause harm. Another example has been shown with tea, which has been associated with improved immune system functioning (Nutrition Research 27 (2007) 373–379), cancer prevention (Carcinogenesis vol.28 no.5 pp.1074–1078, 2007) and decreased death from heart disease as well as overall death (JAMA. 2006;296:1255-1265). However, the concentrated extract was actually shown to potentially cause harm including liver failure (Liver Transpl 12:1892-1895, 2006).</p>, <p>Taking certain medications that are potentially harmful is sometimes acceptable in sick patients where the benefit of the treatment outweighs the risk. However, healthy people would not reasonably take that same risk. Why should we assume that taking a concentrated fruit and vegetable extract found in JP wouldn’t cause problems of its own? Why should healthy people consider any risk when the benefits are so unclear? Remember that just because a little of something is healthy doesn’t mean a lot of that something concentrated into a supplement is healthier—or even healthy at all. A reverse example of this can be seen with black pepper. Studies show that giving the human equivalent of ½ cup of black pepper to mice causes a slow agonizing death. However, a little black pepper in human studies was show to have anti-inflammatory, anti-mutagenic, and anti-cancer effects (Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 47:735–748 (2007). So not only do we need to focus on human studies when evaluating food and health connections but we also need to focus on using natural amounts that we would get in our diet rather than trying to best nature by increasing our intake through the use of concentrated extracts in the form of supplements.</p>, <p>Next on the JP ingredient list are indole carbionols, which are basically hydrolyzed glucosinolates. Glucosinolates are the substances that researchers feel give the cruciferous vegetable family their potent health benefits. Yes, in a lab certain glucosinolates from broccoli seemed to decrease cancer cell growth but does that mean that these foods are health promoting? Possibly, but not necessarily. An interesting article showed that although isothiocyanates and indoles derived from the hydrolysis of glucosinolates, such as sulforaphane and indole-3-carbinol (I3C), have been implicated in a variety of anticarcinogenic mechanisms. Deleterious effects also have been reported in some experimental protocols, including tumor promotion over prolonged periods of exposure (Pharmacol Res. 2007 Mar;55(3):224-36. Epub 2007 Jan 25.). We are by no means telling people to stop eating greens as whole vegetables. However, we are saying that before isolating nutrients from those greens (such as indole carbinols that are added to JP) and consuming them on a daily basis, more studies clearly need to be done.</p>, <p>Other ingredients in JP include lycopene, which is a bright red carotenoid found in foods like tomatoes and watermelon. It is one of the substances thought to be responsible for certain health promoting effects of foods like tomatoes. But could it be possible that lycopene is just one player in a symphony of nutrients? Isolated lycopene, not the tomato, was found in at least one study, NOT to have any benefit on cancer promotion (American Journal of Epidemiology 2009 169(7):815-828). What’s worse, in that same study a close relative of lycopene, lutein, was found to increase cancer risk when taken in supplement form. Other carotenoid supplements have also been linked to increased cancer risk including beta-carotene (N Engl J Med 1996;334:1150-5. ). Once again, here is another example of how taking these isolated nutrients added to a supplement is potentially dangerous, whereas eating the whole food containing these nutrients (among millions of others) is clearly health promoting.</p>, <p>Equally concerning to us are the mixed tocopherol stabilizers in JP. There are large studies that show that vitamin E supplements increase mortality compared to placebo (<em>JAMA</em>. 2007;297(8):842-857). So then when we noticed mixed tocopherol stabilizers were in the list of ingredients of JP, which is just a fancy way of talking about substances with vitamin E activity or vitamin E, we were even more worried. In other words, for all intents and purposes JP also adds vitamin E to the mix of ingredients and we know vitamin E is harmful.</p>, <p>Next are the JP gummies that are marketed as a healthy snack for children. Not only do they have many of the ingredients just reviewed over the last few pages but the calories come from pure junk. How can anything that is 85% corn syrup be healthy? Then another 10% is pure gelatin (animal protein) and another 3% comes from natural flavors and colors. Interestingly, JP gummies were no different than placebo (a sugar pill) in a study looking at JP gummies effects on markers of oxidative stress in children (J Am Diet Assoc. 2002; 102:1652-1657.) So the data there show that JP gummies were no better than a sugar pill, possibly because JP gummies are 85% sugar (corn syrup). JP does advertise the “Children’s Health Study” stating that when people start taking JP they eat less fast foods and soft drinks or they eat more fruits and vegetables (how much more is not clear). But do we really need to take JP to achieve these results or could we save these people some money and potential harm from supplementation, instead focusing on educating them to simply eat less fast food and more fruits and vegetables?</p>, <p>JP always talks about the data supporting its use. They seem to really push the fact that JP has data to stand behind their recommendations. Yes, it is true that JP has funded studies (which is more than we can say for most supplement companies) and at first we were excited when others (including doctors) would tell us about how great the data were. That was until we looked at all of the data and realized they were not as good as you might think. We often hear that supplements are beneficial when using surrogate markers of improved health such as their effects on cholesterol levels or blood vessel spasms or some other biomarker. It is harder (takes more time and people) to see changes in more important health outcomes such as heart attacks and, at the top of the list of importance, death. But relying solely on biomarkers to support the use of a drug or supplement has caused problems over and over again in the past. Think of this as a progression. The easiest benefit for researchers to show are changes in biomarkers like cholesterol levels, the next level of difficulty would be demonstrating changes in the rates of heart attacks and strokes, and then the final, most difficult (but also most important) difficulty level to reach would be to show changes in the rate of death or mortality rate. Even with death rates, companies sponsoring the studies often break that up in an effort to show benefit of their product in any way possible. For example, a product might show a decrease in risk of death FROM CANCER but not overall death. That is not as important to us. In other words, what if your rate of death goes down from cancer but up from heart disease. Then your overall death rate (which is what you really care about) is actually unchanged even though the study looks impressive for advertising a decrease in the rate of death from cancer. So you have to be astute when analyzing the data and we have found that most people who talk about the “data” often overlook areas of potential concern.</p>, <p>So whenever our patients want to get excited over supplements effects on simple biomarkers like cholesterol levels we remind them of a show called, “Mythbusters” (where they do interesting experiments to dispel popular myths). This one particular episode provides a great analogy to the problems that could occur if researchers don’t push to evaluate the most important (although most time consuming and difficult) outcomes like mortality rate or death. This “Mythbusters” episode was looking at magnets as a possible shark repellant (sharks are known to sense electromagnetic energy). They wanted to know if divers could attach magnets to their wetsuits to repel and then safely swim with sharks. This was obviously something important to test prior to just assuming it worked. So just as there are three basic tiers of difficulty when testing medical interventions, this show went through three tiers. The first test they did was on a small shark that they held in hand and then brought a magnet up to its head. The shark immediately pulled away from the magnet. This happened multiple times so they assumed the magnets were a success. However they didn’t start selling magnets as shark repellents because they weren’t quite sure. Instead they took the study to the next level. They put a medium sized shark in a long tank with a line of magnets going across the tank half way down the underwater track. The shark was then released and, on multiple attempts, continued to turn away rather than cross the line of magnets.</p>, <p>So at this point, after two separate shark trials, it appeared that sharks were in fact repelled by magnets. However, with sharks and divers they couldn’t afford to be wrong. So they took the time and expense of taking the experiment to the an even more difficult tier. After all, they had to be sure the magnets were in fact safe shark repellents. For this test they went out to the ocean with divers, cages, cameras, and even bigger sharks. They then took boxes of dead fish and covered the boxes with magnets to see if hungry sharks in the ocean around divers would still be repelled by magnets, the ultimate test if you will. However, in the real ocean setting the sharks ignored the magnets and went right after the boxes of dead fish, attacking them relentlessly. This illustrates an important point. All a diver really cares about is whether they will be attacked by big sharks in the ocean. The small shark thrashing away from the magnet or the medium shark not crossing a line of magnets may be interesting and promising but does not tell the diver exactly what he/she truly needs to know. Similarly, changes in cholesterol numbers after taking supplements are interesting but doesn’t tell us what we really need to know; rather we need to know if we are going to have heart attacks and/or die. Similar to the shark studies, it would be potentially dangerous to assume that just because a pill lowers cholesterol it improves more important health outcomes like heart attack and death rate.</p>, <p>In fact, just looking at rates of heart attacks is still not enough, as most people wouldn’t care about having less heart attacks as a result of a treatment if they were more likely to die from the treatment. Similarly, if the divers just relied on surrogate markers of whether magnets worked as shark repellents (small shark moving away from the magnet or medium shark not crossing a line of magnets in a long tank) they would have come to an incorrect conclusion that magnets are good shark repellents in the ocean, and the divers very likely would have gotten hurt or even died. All we are trying to do is avoid the same issue with supplements or any other intervention where surrogate markers alone are used to recommend a treatment. Just as in the show “Mythbusters,” where they waited until a good study was done on the exact outcome they care about (divers swimming in the ocean with big sharks), we too recommend waiting before taking supplements.</p>, <p>Only when those good studies are done can we be sure that our conclusions of benefit without harm are correct. Who knows why the sharks were first repelled, maybe the magnetic forces felt uncomfortable, as sharks are known to have electromagnetic sensors. But when the situation was more like real life, with hungry sharks not confined to cages, the results were quite different. Similarly, when they do studies with supplements such as vitamin A, beta carotene, vitamin E, folate, iron, etc. and see that there are actually increased rates of cancer and death (despite improvements in blood levels of the nutrients or other biomarkers) the conclusions of whether to use these supplements is then different (see references earlier in the paper). So if your goal is to repel a little shark thrashing in a little tank or to simply change your blood levels of a certain vitamin, then that is one thing but if you are concerned about the bigger picture such as a supplement’s effect on overall death, similar to diving in the ocean and getting eaten by a shark, then you should be compelled (as are we) not to make any conclusions until the bigger, longer, more thorough studies are done.</p>, <p>Technology has done many great things for society but with those benefits also come problems. For example, our ability to measure biomarkers is potentially hurting our health when used as the final decision of whether or not to use a product. We are incorrectly assuming that something is healthy (because it affects biomarkers like cholesterol or homocysteine levels in our blood) rather than actually proving that something is healthy. For example, 200 years ago, because they didn’t have the technology to do otherwise, when testing if a treatment prevented scurvy they had to go out to sea and see if the treatment actually prevented scurvy. They couldn’t be lazy and rely simply on biomarkers. In fact, they did learn that lemons prevented scurvy by testing this at sea but they then ran into another problem, moldy lemons. Even then scientists implemented their reductionist theory hypothesizing that the acid in the lemons was responsible for preventing scurvy. As such, doctors gave sailors diluted sulfuric acid as an antiscorbutic (scurvy prevention). But people still got scurvy not to mention sick from the acid (J. Nutr. 133: 638–645, 2003). In other words, they proved that the proposed treatment was unhelpful by taking them out to sea and looking at an outcome measure that they actually cared about. Then they tried lemon juice reductions into syrups (a way to preserve the lemons) but those too did not prevent scurvy when tested at sea (J. Nutr. 133: 638–645, 2003). In other words, the whole lemons worked but the processed foods and reductionist approaches to other treatments did not. Does JP prevent scurvy? Are you willing to go out to sea with only JP or would you prefer to see a good test first. The truth is that, if given the option, I am not willing to bet my life on it without a good test first and I hope my patients don’t either. The point is exactly that, we just don’t know until we really test it. That is what we need to do with JP (or any other intervention) to know if, for example, it prevents scurvy. We need to take JP and see if people at sea develop it, NOT look at JP’s effect on some biomarker. Unfortunately, our ability to use a biomarker in the present day and age replaces our need and desire to do the bigger and more important tests like testing JP at sea.</p>, <p>When reviewing the data with JP the studies show beneficial effects on surrogate markers like homocysteine and cholesterol, which, even if the studies were flawless, are not enough to recommend usage. However, just to demonstrate how studies need to be carefully analyzed to get the true conclusions we are going to review one of the more popular JP studies on Flow Mediated Dilatation (FMD). We picked FMD because it is not just a blood level of some biochemical marker, rather it is at least an effect in the body, and as such may possibly serve as a better indicator of improved health (at least compared to relying on certain blood levels of biomarkers like cholesterol and homocysteine). We picked this FMD study because its conclusion was very favorable towards JP implying that there was about a 30% reduction in the detrimental effects of high fat meals on the blood vessel (JP protected the vessels from the detrimental effects of high fat meals) compared to no beneficial effect from placebo. Just to clarify, when blood flow increases through a vessel, the vessel dilates. This phenomenon has been coined flow-mediated dilatation (FMD). High fat meals seem to impair this function preventing blood vessels from dilating appropriately. Note how FMD is still a surrogate marker of improved health because people don’t care as much about whether their blood vessel constricts after a fatty meal rather they care about having a heart attack or dying. More importantly, we would want to know that even if a product prevented blood vessel constriction (potentially a good thing) it didn’t also do something harmful, such as increase heart attacks or death (clearly a bad thing). The good news is that this study did not show an increase in heart attacks or death, but the bad news is that is also did not look for an increase in heart attacks of death.</p>, <p>In this study, researchers looked at JP and JP + another antioxidant/herbal supplement called Vineyard (V) and compared them both to placebo (<em>J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.</em> 2003;41;1744-1749). In this study researchers looked at different outcomes in the three groups including cholesterol levels and flow-mediated dilatation (FMD). Interestingly, they induced blood vessel spasm by feeding the test subjects an Egg McMuffin, Sausage McMuffin, two hash brown patties (McDonald’s Corporation), and a non-caffeinated beverage. This meal, despite being 50% fat, was deficient in the essential omega 3 fats (a fat known to be essential for optimal heart and blood vessel functioning) and deficient in many essential vitamins, minerals, and fiber. Anyway, researchers measured what percentage a particular blood vessel dilated (during increased blood flow hence the term Flow Mediated Dilation or FMD) when fasting compared to 3 hours after that high fat McDonald’s meal. It is important to understand that the amount that a blood vessel dilates (FMD) is impaired by a high fat meal but not completely blocked by a high fat meal. As a result the blood vessel still dilates even 3 hours after a high fat meal; however, it dilates by a smaller amount or percentage. For example, you can see in the table below that at baseline in the placebo group the blood vessel dilated by 20.2% when fasting but only by 11.7% 3 hours after a high fat meal (the high fat meal impaired the vessel from fully dilating). So researchers would then summarize that result as an 8.5% absolute reduction in FMD (20.2%-11.7%=8.5%), thought to be due to the high fat meal. What they then attempted to show was that by taking JP for 4 weeks people could prevent a reduction in FMD that typically resulted from a high fat meal, and in a way they were successful. See the chart below for the results (3 hours after a high fat meal):</p>]