How to Reduce the Risk of Food Poisoning From Pesticides The article ( Viral Food Poisoning from Pesticides? ) raises issues, but what do you recommend we do as a response? e.g. I noted in the comments below one reader suggests a 10% vinegar solution. I myself do a vigorous wash of my veg before consumption. I think many would appreciate and benefit from what you regard as best practices for handling fresh veg to be consumed raw. James / Originally posted in Viral Food Poisoning from Pesticides? Answer: Dr. Greger’s video on Norovirus explains possible ways to reduce risk and how the contamination occurs in the first place. From his “Doctor’s Note” under the video: “When you hear of people getting infected with a stomach bug from something like spinach, it’s important to realize that the pathogen didn’t originate from the spinach. Intestinal bugs come from intestines. Greens don’t have guts; plants don’t poop. So the Salmonella in alfalfa sprout seeds ( Don’t Eat Raw Alfalfa Sprouts ) likely came from manure run-off or contaminated irrigation water. But this pesticide angle adds a whole new route for fecal pathogens to pollute produce. Broccoli Sprouts are safer , and organic sprouts may therefore be safer still. Organic foods may also be healthier ( Cancer Fighting Berries ) and don’t carry the potential chemical hazards associated with pesticides.” I think the best we can do is wash our fruits and veggies well and try to eat organic when possible. There doesn’t seem to be a difference rinsing or soaking with cold water vs. vinegar . What about salt-water? Check out Dr. Greger’s video on “ How to Make Your Own Fruit and Vegetable Wash .” I understand this won’t solve outbreak concerns 100%, but it may be a step in the right direction regarding a solution. If folks have the ability to grow a few indoor/outdoor house crops, or find the time to raise some veggies in a Community Garden, that could provide a healthful and beneficial way to know exactly what’s your soil and water. This may reduce contamination risks even further. Image credit/ Frans Persoon via flickr