How much apple cider vinegar is needed for weight loss Vinegar, like apple cider vinegar , may be one condiment that’s good for you. Can Apple Cider Vinegar Help You Lose Weight? Burns Fat As I discuss in my video Does Apple Cider Vinegar Help with Weight Loss? , vinegar is a dilute solution of acetic acid, which takes energy for our body to metabolize, activating an enzyme called AMPK, which is like our body’s fuel gauge. If it senses that we’re low, it amps up energy production, and tells the body to stop storing fat and start burning fat. Increases Satiety Adding vinegar increases satiety—the feeling of being full after a meal. If you eat three slices of white bread, it may fill you up a little, but in less than two hours, not only are you as hungry as you started, but actually hungrier—less satiated than when you began. But if you eat that same amount of bread with some vinegar, you feel twice as full. And even two hours later, you’re still feeling nearly just as full as if you just ate the three pieces of bread plain. But this remarkable increase and prolongation of satiety took nearly two tablespoons of vinegar. Check out my video on this: Optimal Vinegar Dose . How Much Apple Cider Vinegar Helps You Lose Weight? I recommend two teaspoons of vinegar, including apple cider vinegar, with each meal. If you want to drink it, make sure to mix it in a glass of water and, afterward, be sure to rinse your mouth out with water to protect your tooth enamel. You can even add to tea with some lemon juice to aid weight loss. Can You Drink Apple Cider Vinegar Straight To Lose Weight? Don’t drink vinegar straight, as it may cause intractable hiccups and can burn your esophagus, as can apple cider vinegar tablets, if they get lodged in your throat—not that apple cider vinegar tablets necessarily actually have any apple cider vinegar in them at all. Learn more about Vinegar Mechanisms & Side Effects . What Are The Other Health Benefits Of ACV? Enhanced arterial function Cholesterol and triglyceride improvement Decreased blood sugar and insulin spike Check out our delicious and versatile cashew cream recipe, which contains apple cider vinegar. For more information on apple cider vinegar and other weight-loss accelerators, check out my recent live presentation on evidence-based weight loss, the topic of my book How Not to Diet . And, to learn even more about weight loss, visit our topic page , which covers a broad range of the latest evidence-based research.