What Is a Good Source of Probiotics What Are Their Benefits and Side Effects  NutritionFacts.org Probiotics are live bacteria and yeasts, and may be beneficial to our health, especially our gastrointestinal tracts. What Are Probiotics Good For? Mental Health One month of probiotics has been found to significantly decrease symptoms of anxiety, depression, anger, and hostility. A variety of mechanisms has been proposed for how intestinal bacteria may be communicating with our brain. I go into more detail on this in Gut Feelings: Probiotics & Mental Health . Immunity-Enhancing Effects Taking probiotics may have significantly fewer colds , fewer sick days, and fewer symptoms. Diarrhea and Gastroenteritis Probiotics may help prevent antibiotic-associated diarrhea , and appear to speed recovery from acute gastroenteritis. What Is a Good Source of Probiotics? Commercial yogurt of any kind (soy, rice, cow, or coconut) is an insufficient source of the level of probiotic bacteria found effective in treating diarrheal illnesses, inflammatory bowel disease, and irritable bowel syndrome. Yeah, kimchi may not be a good idea . A plant-based diet appears to naturally modulate one’s gut flora. See, for example, my videos Boosting Good Bacteria in the Colon Without Probiotics and Tipping Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes . If, however, you need to bring out the big guns for therapeutic usage or to repopulate your gut after a round of antibiotics, allow me to refer you to the advice of one of my medical mentors, Dr. Michael Klaper, who has some great probiotic tips and insight . When Should Probiotics Be Taken? Should probiotics be taken before, during, or after meals? Though foods may be better carriers for probiotics than supplements, if one does choose to go with supplements, they are most effective taken within 30 minutes before, or simultaneously with a meal or beverage that contains some fat content. Do Probiotic Supplements Have Side Effects? As I discuss in my video Culture Shock – Questioning the Efficacy and Safety of Probiotics , in a study, half the people with pancreatitis got probiotics, half got sugar pills. Within ten days, the mortality rates shot up in the probiotics group, compared to placebo. More than twice as many people died on the probiotics. Thus, probiotics for acute pancreatitis is probably not a good idea. But, further, probiotics can no longer be considered to be completely harmless. Conclusion Unless one has suffered a major disruption of gut flora by antibiotics, or an intestinal infection—unless one is symptomatic—with, like, diarrhea, or bloating, I would suggest focusing on feeding the good bacteria we already have—by eating so-called prebiotics, such as fiber. After all, as we saw before, who knows what you’re getting when you buy probiotics? They may not even be alive by the time you buy them. They also have to survive the journey down to the large intestine. Altogether, these points suggest that the advantages of prebiotics—found in plant foods—outweigh those of probiotics.